[COMMODORE  4 

PROGRAMMER’S 
REFERENCE  GUIDE 


ft  commodore 

COMPUTER 


- 


ABOUT  THE  COMMODORE  64 
PROGRAMMER’S  REFERENCE 
GUIDE  • • • 


Game  cartridge  compatibility  . . . spectacular  sound  . . . arcade 
style  graphics  . . . and  high  caliber  computing  capabilities  make 
the  Commodore  64  the  most  advanced  personal  computer  in 
its  class  for  home,  business  and  educational  use. 

The  COMMODORE  64  PROGRAMMER  S REFERENCE  GUIDE  tells 
you  everything  you  need  to  know  about  your  Commodore  64. 
The  perfect  companion  to  your  Commodore  64  User's  Guide, 
this  manual  presents  detailed  information  on  everything  from 
graphics  and  sound  to  advanced  machine  language 
techniques.  This  book  is  a must  for  everyone  from  the  beginner 
to  the  advanced  programmer. 

For  the  beginner,  the  most  complicated  topics  are  explained 
with  many  sample  programs  and  an  easy-to-read  writing  style. 
For  the  advanced  programmer,  this  book  has  been  subjected 
to  heavy  pre-testing  with  your  needs  in  mind.  And  it’s 
designed  so  that  you  can  easily  get  the  most  out  of  your 
Commodore  64’s  extensive  capabilities. 


commodore 

COMPUTER 


Commodore  Business  Machines.  Inc.— Computer  Systems  Division, 
487  Devon  Park  Drive.  Wayne.  PA  19087. 


n 

I 

n 

h 


$19.95/22056 


ISBN  0-672-22056-3 


COMMODORE  64  S. 
PROGRAMMER'S 
REFERENCE  GUIDE 


Published  by 

Commodore  Business  Machines,  Inc. 


FIRST  EDITION 
EIGHTH  PRINTING-1983 

Copyright  (6)  1982  by  Commodore  Business  Machines,  Inc. 

All  rights  reserved. 

This  manual  is  copyrighted  and  contains  proprietary  information.  No  part  of  this  publica- 
tion may  be  reproduced,  stored  in  a retrieval  system,  or  transmitted  in  any  form  or  by  any 
means,  electronic,  mechanical,  photocopying,  recording,  or  otherwise,  without  the  prior 
written  permission  of  COMMODORE  BUSINESS  MACHINES,  Inc. 


ii 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION ix 

• What's  Included? x 

• How  to  Use  This  Reference  Guide xi 

• Commodore  64  Applications  Guide xii 

• Commodore  Information  Network xvii 

1.  BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 1 

• Introduction 2 

• Screen  Display  Codes  (BASIC  Character  Set) 2 

The  Operating  System  (OS) 2 

• Programming  Numbers  and  Variables  4 

Integer,  Floating-Point  and  String  Constants 4 

Integer,  Floating-Point  and  String  Variables 7 

Integer,  Floating-Point  and  String  Arrays  8 

• Expressions  and  Operators 9 

Arithmetic  Expressions 10 

Arithmetic  Operations 10 

Relational  Operators  12 

Logical  Operators 13 

Hierarchy  of  Operations 15 

String  Operations 16 

String  Expressions 17 

• Programming  Techniques  18 

Data  Conversions 18 

Using  the  INPUT  Statement 18 

Using  the  GET  Statement 22 

How  to  Crunch  BASIC  Programs  24 

2.  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 29 

• Introduction 30 

• BASIC  Keywords,  Abbreviations,  and  Function  Types  31 

• Description  of  BASIC  Keywords  (Alphabetical)  35 

• The  Commodore  64  Keyboard  and  Features  93 

® Screen  Editor 94 


iii 


3.  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS  ON  THE 

COMMODORE  64 99 

• Graphics  Overview  100 

Character  Display  Modes 100 

Bit  Map  Modes 100 

Sprites  100 

• Graphics  Locations  101 

Video  Bank  Selection 101 

Screen  Memory  102 

Color  Memory  103 

Character  Memory 103 

• Standard  Character  Mode 107 

Character  Definitions  107 

• Programmable  Characters  108 

• Multi-Color  Mode  Graphics 115 

Multi-Color  Mode  Bit  115 

• Extended  Background  Color  Mode 120 

• Bit  Mapped  Graphics 121 

Standard  High-Resolution  Bit  Map  Mode 122 

How  It  Works 122 

• Multi-Color  Bit  Map  Mode 127 

• Smooth  Scrolling 128 

• Sprites  131 

Defining  a Sprite  131 

Sprite  Pointers 133 

Turning  Sprites  On 134 

Turning  Sprites  Off 135 

Colors 135 

Multi-Color  Mode  135 

Setting  a Sprite  to  Multi-Color  Mode 136 

Expanded  Sprites  136 

Sprite  Positioning  137 

Sprite  Positioning  Summary 143 

Sprite  Display  Priorities 144 

Collision  Detects  144 

• Other  Graphics  Features  150 

Screen  Blanking  150 

Raster  Register 150 

Interrupt  Status  Register 151 

Suggested  Screen  and  Character  Color  Combinations  . . . 152 

iv 


• Programming  Sprites — Another  Look  153 

Making  Sprites  in  BASIC — A Short  Program 153 

Crunching  Your  Sprite  Programs 156 

Positioning  Sprites  on  the  Screen  157 

Sprite  Priorities 161 

Drawing  a Sprite  162 

Creating  a Sprite  . . . Step  by  Step 163 

Moving  Your  Sprite  on  the  Screen 165 

Vertical  Scrolling 166 

The  Dancing  Mouse — A Sprite  Program  Example 166 

Easy  Spritemaking  Chart 176 

Spritemaking  Notes 177 


4.  PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 

ON  YOUR  COMMODORE  64 183 

• Introduction 184 

Volume  Control 186 

Frequencies  of  Sound  Waves 186 

• Using  Multiple  Voices 187 

Controlling  Multiple  Voices  191 

• Changing  Waveforms 192 

Understanding  Waveforms 194 

• The  Envelope  Generator 196 

• Filtering 199 

• Advanced  Techniques 202 

• Synchronization  and  Ring  Modulation  207 

5.  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 209 

• What  is  Machine  Language? 210 

What  Does  Machine  Code  Look  Like? 211 

Simple  Memory  Map  of  the  Commodore  64 212 

The  Registers  Inside  the  6510  Microprocessor  213 

• How  Do  You  Write  Machine  Language  Programs?  214 

64MON 215 

• Hexadecimal  Notation 215 

Your  First  Machine  Language  Instruction  218 

Writing  Your  First  Program  220 

• Addressing  Modes 221 

Zero  Page 221 

The  Stack 222 


v 


• Indexing 223 

Indirect  Indexed  223 

Indexed  Indirect 224 

Branches  and  Testing 226 

• Subroutines  228 

• Useful  Tips  for  the  Beginner 229 

• Approaching  a Large  Task 230 

• MCS6510  Microprocessor  Instruction  Set — 

Alphabetic  Sequence  232 

Instruction  Addressing  Modes  and 

Related  Execution  Times 254 

• Memory  Management  on  the  Commodore  64  260 

• The  KERNAL 268 

• KERNAL  Power-Up  Activities 269 

How  to  Use  the  KERNAL 270 

User  Callable  KERNAL  Routines  272 

Error  Codes 306 

• Using  Machine  Language  From  BASIC 307 

Where  to  Put  Machine  Language  Routines 309 

How  to  Enter  Machine  Language  309 

• Commodore  64  Memory  Map 310 

Commodore  64  Input/Output  Assignments 320 

6.  INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 335 

• Introduction 336 

• Output  to  the  TV 336 

• Output  to  Other  Devices 337 

Output  to  Printer 338 

Output  to  Modem  339 

Working  With  Cassette  Tape 340 

Data  Storage  on  Floppy  Diskettes 342 

• The  Game  Ports 343 

Paddles  346 

Light  Pen 348 

• RS-232  Interface  Description  348 

General  Outline  348 

Opening  an  RS-232  Channel 349 

Getting  Data  From  an  RS-232  Channel  352 

Sending  Data  to  an  RS-232  Channel 353 

Closing  an  RS-232  Data  Channel 354 

Sample  BASIC  Programs 356 

vi 


Receiver/Transmitter  Buffer  Base  Location  Pointers 357 

Zero-Page  Memory  Locations  and  Usage 

for  RS-232  System  Interface 358 

Nonzero-Page  Memory  Locations  and  Usage 

for  RS-232  System  Interface 358 

• The  User  Port 359 

Port  Pin  Description  359 

• The  Serial  Bus 362 

Serial  Bus  Pinouts 363 

• The  Expansion  Port 366 

• Z-80  Microprocessor  Cartridge 368 

Using  Commodore  CP/M® 369 

Running  Commodore  CP/M® 369 

APPENDICES 373 

A.  Abbreviations  for  BASIC  Keywords 374 

B.  Screen  Display  Codes  376 

C.  ASCII  and  CHR$  Codes 379 

D.  Screen  and  Color  Memory  Maps 382 

E.  Music  Note  Values 384 

F.  Bibliography 388 

G.  VIC  Chip  Register  Map 391 

H.  Deriving  Mathematical  Functions  394 

I.  Pinouts  for  Input/Output  Devices 395 

J.  Converting  Standard  BASIC  Programs  to 

Commodore  64  BASIC 398 

K.  Error  Messages 400 

L.  6510  Microprocessor  Chip  Specifications 402 

M.  6526  Complex  Interface  Adapter  (CIA) 

Chip  Specifications 419 

N.  6566/6567  (VIC-II)  Chip  Specifications 436 

O.  6581  Sound  Interface  Device  (SID)  Chip  Specifications  . . . 457 

P.  Glossary  482 

INDEX 483 

COMMODORE  64  QUICK  REFERENCE  CARD  487 

SCHEMATIC  DIAGRAM  OF  THE  COMMODORE  64  491 

vii 


INTRODUCTION 


The  COMMODORE  64/EXECUTIVE  64  PROGRAMMER'S  REFERENCE 
GUIDE  has  been  developed  as  a working  tool  and  reference  source  for 
those  of  you  who  want  to  maximize  your  use  of  the  built-in  capabilities 
of  your  COMMODORE  64  and  EXECUTIVE  64.  This  manual  contains  the 
information  you  need  for  your  programs,  from  the  simplest  example  all 
the  way  to  the  most  complex.  The  PROGRAMMER'S  REFERENCE  GUIDE 
is  designed  so  that  everyone  from  the  beginning  BASIC  programmer  to 
the  professional  experienced  in  6502  machine  language  can  get  infor- 
mation to  develop  his  or  her  own  creative  programs.  At  the  same  time 
this  book  shows  you  how  clever  your  64  really  is. 

This  REFERENCE  GUIDE  is  not  designed  to  teach  the  BASIC  pro- 
gramming language  or  the  6502  machine  language.  There  is,  however, 
an  extensive  glossary  of  terms  and  a "semi-tutorial"  approach  to  many 
of  the  sections  in  the  book.  If  you  don't  already  have  a working  knowl- 
edge of  BASIC  and  how  to  use  it  to  program,  we  suggest  that  you  study 
the  COMMODORE  64  USER'S  GUIDE  that  came  with  your  computer.  The 
USER'S  GUIDE  gives  you  an  easy  to  read  introduction  to  the  BASIC  pro- 
gramming language.  If  you  still  have  difficulty  understanding  how  to  use 
BASIC  then  turn  to  the  back  of  this  book  (or  Appendix  N in  the  USER'S 
GUIDE)  and  check  out  the  Bibliography. 

The  COMMODORE  64/EXECUTIVE  64  PROGRAMMER'S  REFERENCE 
GUIDE  is  just  that;  a reference.  Like  most  reference  books,  your  ability  to 
apply  the  information  creatively  really  depends  on  how  much  knowledge 
you  have  about  the  subject.  In  other  words  if  you  are  a novice  pro- 
grammer you  will  not  be  able  to  use  all  the  facts  and  figures  in  this  book 
until  you  expand  your  current  programming  knowledge. 

ix 


i 


What  you  can  do  with  this  book  is  to  find  a considerable  amount  of 
valuable  programming  reference  information  written  in  easy  to  read, 
plain  English  with  the  programmer's  jargon  explained.  On  the  other 
hand  the  programming  professional  will  find  all  the  information  needed 
to  use  the  capabilities  of  the  64  effectively. 

WHAT'S  INCLUDED? 

• Our  complete  "BASIC  dictionary"  includes  Commodore  BASIC  lan- 
guage commands,  statements  and  functions  listed  in  alphabetical 
order.  We've  created  a "quick  list"  which  contains  all  the  words 
and  their  abbreviations.  This  is  followed  by  a section  containing  a 
more  detailed  definition  of  each  word  along  with  sample  BASIC 
programs  to  illustrate  how  they  work. 

• If  you  need  an  introduction  to  using  machine  language  with  BASIC 
programs  our  layman's  overview  will  get  you  started. 

• A powerful  feature  of  all  Commodore  computers  is  called  the  KER- 
NAL.  It  helps  insure  that  the  programs  you  write  today  can  also  be 
used  on  your  Commodore  computer  of  tomorrow. 

• The  Input/Output  Programming  section  gives  you  the  opportunity  to 
use  your  computer  to  the  limit.  It  describes  how  to  hook-up  and  use 
everything  from  lightpens  and  joysticks  to  disk  drives,  printers,  and 
telecommunication  devices  called  modems. 

• You  can  explore  the  world  of  SPRITES,  programmable  characters, 
and  high  resolution  graphics  for  the  most  detailed  and  advanced 
animated  pictures  in  the  microcomputer  industry. 

• You  can  also  enter  the  world  of  music  synthesis  and  create  your 
own  songs  and  sound  effects  with  the  best  built-in  synthesizer 
available  in  any  personal  computer. 

• If  you're  an  experienced  programmer,  the  soft  load  language  sec- 
tion gives  you  information  about  the  64's  ability  to  run  CP/M*  and 
high  level  languages.  This  is  in  addition  to  BASIC. 

Think  of  your  64  PROGRAMMER'S  REFERENCE  GUIDE  as  a useful  tool 
to  help  you  and  you  will  enjoy  the  hours  of  programming  ahead  of  you. 


*C P/M  is  a registered  trademark  of  Digital  Research,  Inc. 


x INTRODUCTION 


HOW  TO  USE  THIS  REFERENCE  GUIDE 


Throughout  this  manual  certain  conventional  notations  are  used  to  de- 
scribe the  syntax  (programming  sentence  structure)  of  BASIC  commands 
or  statements  and  to  show  both  the  required  and  optional  parts  of  each 
BASIC  keyword.  The  rules  to  use  for  interpreting  statement  syntax  are  as 
follows: 

1 . BASIC  keywords  are  shown  in  capital  letters.  They  must  appear 
where  shown  in  the  statement,  entered  and  spelled  exactly  as  shown. 

2.  Items  shown  within  quotation  marks  ("  ")  indicate  variable  data 
which  you  must  put  in.  Both  the  quotation  marks  and  the  data 
inside  the  quotes  must  appear  where  shown  in  each  statement. 

3.  Items  inside  the  square  brackets  ([  ])  indicate  an  optional  state- 
ment parameter.  A parameter  is  a limitation  or  additional  qualifier 
for  your  statements.  If  you  use  an  optional  parameter  you  must 
supply  the  data  for  that  optional  parameter.  In  addition,  ellipses 
(...)  show  that  an  optional  item  can  be  repeated  as  many  times 
as  a programming  line  allows. 

4.  If  an  item  in  the  square  brackets  ([  ])  is  UNDERLINED,  that  means 
that  you  MUST  use  those  certain  characters  in  the  optional  pa- 
rameters, and  they  also  have  to  be  spelled  exactly  as  shown. 

5.  Items  inside  angle  brackets  (<>)  indicate  variable  data  which  you 
provide.  While  the  slash  ( / ) indicates  that  you  must  make  a choice 
between  two  mutually  exclusive  options. 

EXAMPLE  OF  SYNTAX  FORMAT: 

OPEN<file-num>,<device>  [,<address>],  ["<drive>:  <file- 

name>]  [,<mode>]" 

EXAMPLES  OF  ACTUAL  STATEMENTS: 

10  OPEN  2/8,6//0:STOCK  FOUO,S, W" 

20  OPEN  1,1  ^/'CHECKBOOK" 

30  OPEN  3,4 

When  you  actually  apply  the  syntax  conventions  in  a practical  situa- 
tion, the  sequence  of  parameters  in  your  statements  might  not  be 
exactly  the  same  as  the  sequence  shown  in  syntax  examples.  The 
examples  are  not  meant  to  show  every  possible  sequence.  They  are 
intended  to  present  all  required  and  optional  parameters. 

INTRODUCTION  xi 


Programming  examples  in  this  book  are  shown  with  blanks  separating 
words  and  operators  for  the  sake  of  readability.  Normally  though, 
BASIC  doesn't  require  blanks  between  words  unless  leaving  them  out 
would  give  you  an  ambiguous  or  incorrect  syntax. 

Shown  below  are  some  examples  and  descriptions  of  the  symbols 
used  for  various  statement  parameters  in  the  following  chapters.  The  list 
is  not  meant  to  show  every  possibility,  but  to  give  you  a better  under- 
standing as  to  how  syntax  examples  are  presented. 


SYMBOL 

<file-num> 

<device> 

<address> 

<drive> 

<file-name> 

<constant> 

<variable> 

<string> 

<number> 


EXAMPLE 

50 

4 

15 


0 

"TEST.  DATA" 
"ABCDEFG" 

XI 45 

AB$ 

12345 


<line-number>  1000 
<numeric>  1 .5E4 


DESCRIPTION 

A logical  file  number 
A hardware  device  number 
A serial  bus  secondary 
device  address 
number 

A physical  disk  drive  number 
The  name  of  a data  or  program  file 
Literal  data  supplied  by 
the  programmer 

Any  BASIC  data  variable  name  or 
constant 

Use  of  a string  type  variable  required 
Use  of  a numeric  type  variable 
required 

An  actual  program  line  number 
An  integer  or  floating-point  variable 


COMMODORE  64  APPLICATIONS  GUIDE 


When  you  first  thought  about  buying  a computer  you  probably  asked 
yourself,  "Now  that  I can  afford  to  buy  a computer,  what  can  I do  with 
it  once  I get  one?" 

The  great  thing  about  your  COMMODORE  64  is  that  you  can  make  it 
do  what  YOU  want  it  to  do!  You  can  make  it  calculate  and  keep  track  of 
home  and  business  budget  needs.  You  can  use  it  for  word  processing. 
You  can  make  it  play  arcade-style  action  games.  You  can  make  it  sing. 
You  can  even  create  your  own  animated  cartoons,  and  more.  The  best 
part  of  owning  a COMMODORE  64  is  that  even  if  it  did  only  one  of  the 
things  listed  below  it  would  be  well  worth  the  price  you  paid  for  it.  But 
the  64  is  a complete  computer  and  it  does  do  EVERYTHING  listed  and 
then  some! 


xii 


INTRODUCTION 


By  the  way,  in  addition  to  everything  here  you  can  pick  up  a lot  of 
other  creative  and  practical  ideas  by  signing  up  with  a local  Commo- 
dore Users'  Club,  subscribing  to  the  COMMODORE  and  POWER/PLAY 
magazines,  and  joining  the  COMMODORE  INFORMATION  NETWORK  on 
CompuServe™  . 


APPLICATION 

COMMENTS/REQUIREMENTS 

ACTION  PACKED 

GAMES 

You  can  get  real  Bally  Midway  arcade  games 
like  Omega  Race,  Gorf  and  Wizard  of  Wor,  as 
well  as  "play  and  learn"  games  like  Math 
Teacher  1,  Home  Babysitter  and  Commodore 
Artist. 

ADVERTISING  & 

MERCHANDISING 

Hook  your  COMMODORE  64  to  a TV,  put  it  in 
a store  window  with  a flashing,  animated, 
and  musical  message  and  you've  got  a great 
point  of  purchase  store  display. 

ANIMATION 

Commodore's  Sprite  Graphics  allow  you  to 
create  real  cartoons  with  8 different  levels  so 
that  shapes  can  move  in  front  of  or  behind 
each  other. 

BABYSITTING 

The  COMMODORE  64  HOME  BABYSITTER 
cartridge  can  keep  your  youngest  child  occu- 
pied for  hours  and  teach  alphabet/  keyboard 
recognition  at  the  same  time.  It  also  teaches 
special  learning  concepts  and  relationships. 

BASIC  PROGRAMMING 

Your  COMMODORE  64  USER'S  GUIDE  and  the 

TEACH  YOURSELF  PROGRAMMING  series  of 
books  and  tapes  offer  an  excellent  starting 
point. 

BUSINESS 

SPREADSHEET 

The  COMMODORE  64  offers  the  "Easy"  series 
of  business  aids  including  the  most  powerful 
word  processor  and  largest  spreadsheet 
available  for  any  personal  computer. 

COMMUNICATION 

Enter  the  fascinating  world  of  computer  "net- 
working." If  you  hook  a VICMODEM  to  your 
COMMODORE  64  you  can  communicate  with 
other  computer  owners  all  around  the  world. 

INTRODUCTION 


xiii 


COMPOSING  SONGS 

Not  only  that,  if  you  join  the  COMMODORE 
INFORMATION  NETWORK  on  CompuServe™ 
you  can  get  the  latest  news  and  updates  on 
all  Commodore  products,  financial  informa- 
tion, shop  at  home  services,  you  can  even 
play  games  with  the  friends  you  make  through 
the  information  systems  you  join. 

The  COMMODORE  64  is  equipped  with  the 
most  sophisticated  built-in  music  synthesizer 
available  on  any  computer.  It  has  three  com- 
pletely programmable  voices,  nine  full  music 
octaves,  and  four  controllable  waveforms. 
Look  for  Commodore  Music  Cartridges  and 
Commodore  Music  books  to  help  you  create  or 
reproduce  all  kinds  of  music  and  sound  effects. 

CP/M* 

Commodore  offers  a CP/M*  add-on  and  ac- 
cess to  software  through  an  easy-to-load  car- 
tridge. 

DEXTERITY  TRAINING 

Hand/Eye  coordination  and  manual  dexterity 
are  aided  by  several  Commodore  games  . . . 
including  "Jupiter  Lander"  and  night  driving 
simulation. 

EDUCATION 

While  working  with  a computer  is  an  educa- 
tion in  itself,  The  COMMODORE  Educational 
Resource  Book  contains  general  information 
on  the  educational  uses  of  computers.  We 
also  have  a variety  of  learning  cartridges  de- 
signed to  teach  everything  from  music  to  math 
and  art  to  astronomy. 

FOREIGN  LANGUAGE 

The  COMMODORE  64  programmable  char- 
acter set  lets  you  replace  the  standard  char- 
acter set  with  user  defined  foreign  language 
characters. 

GRAPHICS  AND  ART 

In  addition  to  the  Sprite  Graphics  mentioned 
above,  the  COMMODORE  64  offers  high- 
resolution,  multi-color  graphics  plotting,  pro- 

*CP/M  is  a Registered  trademark  of  Digital  Research,  Inc. 


xiv  INTRODUCTION 


INSTRUMENT 

CONTROL 


JOURNALS  AND 
CREATIVE  WRITING 


LIGHTPEN  CONTROL 


MACHINE  CODE 
PROGRAMMING 


PAYROLL  & FORMS 
PRINTOUT 


PRINTING 


RECIPES 


grammable  characters,  and  combinations  of 
all  the  different  graphics  and  character  dis- 
play modes. 

Your  COMMODORE  64  h as  a serial  port, 
RS-232  port  and  a user  port  for  use  with  a 
variety  of  special  industrial  applications.  An 
IEEE/488  cartridge  is  also  available  as  an  op- 
tional extra. 

The  COMMODORE  64  will  soon  offer  an  ex- 
ceptional wordprocessing  system  that  matches 
or  exceeds  the  qualities  and  flexibilities  of 
most  "high-priced"  wordprocessors  available. 
Of  course  you  can  save  the  information  on 
either  a 1541  Disk  Drive  or  a Datassette™ 
recorder  and  have  it  printed  out  using  a VIC- 
PRINTER  or  PLOTTER. 

Applications  requiring  the  use  of  a lightpen 
can  be  performed  by  any  lightpen  that  will  fit 
the  COMMODORE  64  game  port  connector. 

Your  COMMODORE  64  PROGRAMMER'S  REF- 
ERENCE GUIDE  includes  a machine  language 
section,  as  well  as  a BASIC  to  machine  code 
interface  section.  There's  even  a bibliography 
available  for  more  in-depth  study. 

The  COMMODORE  64  can  be  programmed  to 
handle  a variety  of  entry-type  business  appli- 
cations. Upper/lower  case  letters  combined 
with  C64  "business  form"  graphics  make  it 
easy  for  you  to  design  forms  which  can  then 
be  printed  on  your  printer. 

The  COMMODORE  64  interfaces  with  a vari- 
ety of  dot  matrix  and  letter  quality  printers  as 
well  as  plotters. 

You  can  store  your  favorite  recipes  on  your 
COMMODORE  64  and  its  disk  or  cassette 
storage  unit,  and  end  the  need  for  messy  rec- 
ipe cards  that  often  get  lost  when  you  need 
them  most. 


INTRODUCTION  xv 


SIMULATIONS 


SPORTS  DATA 


STOCK  QUOTES 


Computer  simulations  let  you  conduct  danger- 
ous or  expensive  experiments  at  minimum  risk 
and  cost. 

The  Source™  and  CompuServe™  both  offer 
sports  information  which  you  can  get  using 
your  COMMODORE  64  and  a VICMODEM. 

With  a VICMODEM  and  a subscription  to  any 
of  the  appropriate  network  services,  your 
COMMODORE  64  becomes  your  own  private 
stock  ticker. 


These  are  just  a few  of  the  many  applications  for  you  and  your 
COMMODORE  64.  As  you  can  see,  for  work  or  play,  at  home,  in  school 
or  the  office,  your  COMMODORE  64  gives  you  a practical  solution  for 
just  about  any  need. 

Commodore  wants  you  to  know  that  our  support  for  users  only  STARTS 
with  your  purchase  of  a Commodore  computer.  That's  why  we've 
created  two  publications  with  Commodore  information  from  around  the 
world,  and  a two-way"  computer  information  network  with  valuable 
input  for  users  in  the  U.S.  and  Canada  from  coast  to  coast. 

In  addition,  we  wholeheartedly  encourage  and  support  the  growth  of 
Commodore  Users'  Clubs  around  the  world.  They  are  an  excellent  source 
of  information  for  every  Commodore  computer  owner  from  the  beginner 
to  the  most  advanced.  The  magazines  and  network,  which  are  more 
fully  described  below,  have  the  most  up-to-date  information  about  how 
to  get  involved  with  the  Users'  Club  in  your  area. 

Finally,  your  local  Commodore  dealer  is  a useful  source  of  Commo- 
dore support  and  information. 

POWER/PLAY 

The  Home  Computer  Magazine 

When  it  comes  to  entertainment,  learning  at  home  and  practical  home 
applications,  POWER/PLAY  is  THE  prime  source  of  information  for  Com- 
modore home  users.  Find  out  where  your  nearest  user  clubs  are  and 
what  they're  doing,  learn  about  software,  games,  programming  tech- 
niques, telecommunications,  and  new  products.  POWER/PLAY  is  your 
personal  connection  to  other  Commodore  users,  outside  software  and 
hardware  developers,  and  to  Commodore  itself.  Published  quarterly. 
Only  $10.00  for  a year  of  home  computing  excitement. 


xvi  INTRODUCTION 


COMMODORE 

The  Microcomputer  Magazine 

Widely  read  by  educators,  businessmen  and  students,  as  well  as 
home  computerists,  COMMODORE  Magazine  is  our  main  vehicle  for 
sharing  exclusive  information  on  the  more  technical  use  of  Commodore 
systems.  Regular  departments  cover  business,  science  and  education, 
programming  tips,  "excerpts  from  a technical  notebook/'  and  many 
other  features  of  interest  to  anyone  who  uses  or  is  thinking  about  pur- 
chasing Commodore  equipment  for  business,  scientific  or  educational 
applications.  COMMODORE  is  the  ideal  complement  to  POWER/  PLAY. 
Published  bi-monthly.  Subscription  price:  $15.00  per  year. 

AND  FOR  EVEN  MORE  INFORMATION  . . . 

. . . DIAL  UP  OUR  PAPERLESS  USER  MAGAZINE 

COMMODORE  INFORMATION  NETWORK 

The  magazine  of  the  future  is  here.  To  supplement  and  enhance  your 
subscription  to  POWER/PLAY  and  COMMODORE  magazines,  the  COM- 
MODORE INFORMATION  NETWORK — our  "paperless  magazine"  — is 
available  now  over  the  telephone  using  your  Commodore  computer  and 
modem. 

Join  our  computer  club,  get  help  with  a computing  problem,  "talk"  to 
other  Commodore  friends,  or  get  up-to-the-minute  information  on  new 
products,  software  and  educational  resources.  Soon  you  will  even  be 
able  to  save  yourself  the  trouble  of  typing  in  the  program  listings  you 
find  in  POWER/PLAY  or  COMMODORE  by  downloading  direct  from  the 
Information  Network  (a  new  user  service  planned  for  early  1983).  The 
best  part  is  that  most  of  the  answers  are  there  before  you  even  ask  the 
questions.  (How's  that  for  service?) 

To  call  our  electronic  magazine  you  need  only  a modem  and  a sub- 
scription to  CompuServe™,  one  of  the  nation's  largest  telecommunica- 
tions networks.  (To  make  it  easy  for  you  Commodore  includes  a FREE 
year's  subscription  to  CompuServe™  in  each  VICMODEM  package.) 

Just  dial  your  local  number  for  the  CompuServe™  data  bank  and 
connect  your  phone  to  the  modem.  When  the  CompuServe™  video  text 
appears  on  your  screen  type  G CBM  on  your  computer  keyboard.  When 
the  COMMODORE  INFORMATION  NETWORK'S  table  of  contents,  or 
"menu,"  appears  on  your  screen  choose  from  one  of  our  sixteen  de- 
partments, make  yourself  comfortable,  and  enjoy  the  paperless  maga- 
zine other  magazines  are  writing  about. 


INTRODUCTION  xvii 


For  more  information,  visit  your  Commodore  dealer. 


COMMODORE  INFORMATION  NETWORK 


Main  Menu  Description 

Commodore  Dealers 

Direct  Access  Codes 

Educational  Resources 

Special  Commands 

User  Groups 

User  Questions 

Descriptions 

Public  Bulletin  Board 

Questions  and  Answers 

Magazines  and  Newsletters 

Software  Tips 

Products  Announced 

Technical  Tips 

Commodore  News  Direct 

Directory  Descriptions 

xviii  INTRODUCTION 


CHAPTER 


BASIC 

PROGRAMMING 

RULES 


• Introduction 

• Screen  Display  Codes  (BASIC 
Character  Set) 

• Programming  Numbers  and 
Variables 

• Expressions  and  Operators 

• Programming  Techniques 


INTRODUCTION 


This  chapter  talks  about  how  BASIC  stores  and  manipulates  data.  The 
topics  include: 

1)  A brief  mention  of  the  operating  system  components  and  functions 
as  well  as  the  character  set  used  in  the  Commodore  64. 

2)  The  formation  of  constants  and  variables.  What  types  of  variables 
there  are.  And  how  constants  and  variables  are  stored  in  memory. 

3)  The  rules  for  arithmetic  calculations,  relationship  tests,  string  han- 
dling, and  logical  operations.  Also  included  are  the  rules  for  form- 
ing expressions,  and  the  data  conversions  necessary  when  you're 
using  BASIC  with  mixed  data  types. 


SCREEN  DISPLAY  CODES 
(BASIC  CHARACTER  SET) 

THE  OPERATING  SYSTEM  (OS) 

The  Operating  System  is  contained  in  the  Read  Only  Memory  (ROM) 
chips  and  is  a combination  of  three  separate,  but  interrelated,  program 
modules. 

1)  The  BASIC  Interpreter 

2)  The  KERNAL 

3)  The  Screen  Editor 

1)  The  BASIC  Interpreter  is  responsible  for  analyzing  BASIC  state- 
ment syntax  and  for  performing  the  required  calculations  and/or 
data  manipulation.  The  BASIC  Interpreter  has  a vocabulary  of  65 
"keywords"  which  have  special  meanings.  The  upper  and  lower 
case  alphabet  and  the  digits  0-9  are  used  to  make  both  keywords 
and  variable  names.  Certain  punctuation  characters  and  special 
symbols  also  have  meanings  for  the  Interpreter.  Table  1-1  lists  the 
special  characters  and  their  uses. 

2)  The  KERNAL  handles  most  of  the  interrupt  level  processing  in  the 
system  (for  details  on  interrupt  level  processing,  see  Chapter  5). 
The  KERNAL  also  does  the  actual  input  and  output  of  data. 

3)  The  Screen  Editor  controls  the  output  to  the  video  screen  (television 
set)  and  the  editing  of  BASIC  program  text.  In  addition,  the  Screen 
Editor  intercepts  keyboard  input  so  that  it  can  decide  whether  the 


2 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


Table  1-1.  CBM  BASIC  Character  Set 


CHARACTER 

NAME  and  DESCRIPTION 

/ 

BLANK — separates  keywords  and  variable  names 
SEMI-COLON  — used  in  variable  lists  to  format  output 

= 

EQUAL  SIGN — value  assignment  and  relationship 

+ 

testing 

PLUS  SIGN — arithmetic  addition  or  string  concatenation 



(concatenation:  linking  together  in  a chain) 
MINUS  SIGN — arithmetic  subtraction,  unary  minus  (—  1 ) 

* 

ASTERISK — arithmetic  multiplication 

/ 

SLASH — arithmetic  division 

t 

UP  ARROW — arithmetic  exponentiation 

( 

LEFT  PARENTHESIS — expression  evaluation  and 

) 

functions 

RIGHT  PARENTHESIS — expression  evaluation  and 

% 

functions 

PERCENT  — declares  variable  name  as  an  integer 

# 

NUMBER — comes  before  logical  file  number  in  input/ 

$ 

output  statements 

DOLLAR  SIGN  — declares  variable  name  as  a string 

/ 

COMMA — used  in  variable  lists  to  format  output; 

also  separates  command  parameters 

PERIOD — decimal  point  in  floating  point  constants 

“ 

QUOTATION  MARK — encloses  string  constants 

COLON  — separates  multiple  BASIC  statements  in  a line 

? 

QUESTION  MARK — abbreviation  for  the  keyword  PRINT 

< 

LESS  THAN  — used  in  relationship  tests 

> 

GREATER  THAN  — used  in  relationship  tests 

IT 

PI — the  numeric  constant  3.141592654 

characters  put  in  should  be  acted  upon  immediately,  or  passed  on 
to  the  BASIC  Interpreter. 


The  Operating  System  gives  you  two  modes  of  BASIC  operation: 

1)  DIRECT  Mode 

2)  PROGRAM  Mode 


1)  When  you're  using  the  DIRECT  mode,  BASIC  statements  don't  have 

line  numbers  in  front  of  the  statement.  They  are  executed 
whenever  the  key  is  pressed. 

2)  The  PROGRAM  mode  is  the  one  you  use  for  running  programs. 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


3 


When  using  the  PROGRAM  mode,  all  of  your  BASIC  statements 
must  have  line  numbers  in  front  of  them.  You  can  have  more  than 
one  BASIC  statement  in  a line  of  your  program,  but  the  number  of 
statements  is  limited  by  the  fact  that  you  can  only  put  80  char- 
acters on  a logical  screen  line.  This  means  that  if  you  are  going  to 
go  over  the  80  character  limit  you  have  to  put  the  entire  BASIC 
statement  that  doesn't  fit  on  a new  line  with  a new  line  number. 


NOTE:  Always  type  NEW  and  hit 


RETURN 


before  starting  a new  program. 


The  Commodore  64  has  two  complete  character  sets  that  you  can  use 
either  from  the  keyboard  or  in  your  programs. 

In  SET  1,  the  upper  case  alphabet  and  the  numbers  0-9  are  available 
without  pressing  the  key.  If  you  hold  down  the  key 

while  typing,  the  graphics  characters  on  the  RIGHT  side  of  the  front  of 
the  keys  are  used.  If  you  hold  down  the  B key  while  typing,  the 
graphics  characters  on  the  LEFT  side  of  the  front  of  the  key  are  used. 
Holding  down  the  QQQ  key  while  typing  any  character  that  doesn't 
have  graphic  symbols  on  the  front  of  the  key  gives  you  the  symbol  on  the 
top  most  part  of  the  key. 

In  SET  2,  the  lower  case  alphabet  and  the  numbers  0-9  are  available 
without  pressing  the  key.  The  upper  case  alphabet  is  available 

when  you  hold  down  the  key  while  typing.  Again,  the  graphic 

symbols  on  the  LEFT  side  of  the  front  of  the  keys  are  displayed  by  press- 
ing the  0 key,  while  the  symbols  on  the  top  most  part  of  any  key 
without  graphics  characters  are  selected  when  you  hold  down 
the  key  while  typing. 

To  switch  from  one  character  set  to  the  other  press  the  0 and 
the  keys  together. 

on  t^e  standard  C64  produces  LOAD  RUN 

which  loads  the  next  file  off  cassette  and  attempts  to  execute 
it. 


SHIFT  I RUN/STOP 


on  the  EXECUTIVE  SX-64  or  DX-64  performs  a 


LOAD 


RETURN 


RUN 


RETURN 


If  you  try  to  access  device  1 (normally  Datassette)  on  the  EXECUTIVE 
64  series,  an  ?ILLEGAL  DEVICE  NUMBER  ERROR  is  returned  from 
BASIC,  while  C-SET  and  .A=9  is  returned  to  the  calling  routine.. 


4 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


PROGRAMMING  NUMBERS  AND  VARIABLES 

INTEGER,  FLOATING-POINT  AND  STRING  CONSTANTS 

Constants  are  the  data  values  that  you  put  in  your  BASIC  statements. 
BASIC  uses  these  values  to  represent  data  during  statement  execution. 
CBM  BASIC  can  recognize  and  manipulate  three  types  of  constants: 

1)  INTEGER  NUMBERS 

2)  FLOATING-POINT  NUMBERS 

3)  STRINGS 

Integer  constants  are  whole  numbers  (numbers  without  decimal 
points).  Integer  constants  must  be  between  —32768  and  +32767.  In- 
teger constants  do  not  have  decimal  points  or  commas  between  digits. 
If  the  plus  (+)  sign  is  left  out,  the  constant  is  assumed  to  be  a positive 
number.  Zeros  coming  before  a constant  are  ignored  and  shouldn't  be 
used  since  they  waste  memory  and  slow  down  your  program.  However, 
they  won't  cause  an  error.  Integers  are  stored  in  memory  as  two-byte 
binary  numbers.  Some  examples  of  integer  constants  are: 

-12 
8765 
-32768 
+ 44 
0 

-32767 


NOTE:  Do  Put  commas  inside  any  number.  For  example,  always  type  32,000  as 
32000.  If  you  put  a comma  in  the  middle  of  a number  you  will  get  the  BASIC  error 
message  7SYNTAX  ERROR. 


Floating-point  constants  are  positive  or  negative  numbers  and  can 
contain  fractions.  Fractional  parts  of  a number  may  be  shown  using  a 
decimal  point.  Once  again  remember  that  commas  are  NOT  used  be- 
tween numbers.  If  the  plus  sign  (+)  is  left  off  the  front  of  a number,  the 
Commodore  64  assumes  that  the  number  is  positive.  If  you  leave  off  the 
decimal  point  the  computer  will  assume  that  it  follows  the  last  digit  of 
the  number.  And  as  with  integers,  zeros  that  come  before  a constant 
are  ignored.  Floating-point  constants  can  be  used  in  two  ways: 


1)  SIMPLE  NUMBER 

2)  SCIENTIFIC  NOTATION 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES  5 


Floating-point  constants  will  show  you  up  to  nine  digits  on  your  screen. 
These  digits  can  represent  values  between  —999999999.  and 
+ 999999999.  If  you  enter  more  than  nine  digits  the  number  will  be 
rounded  based  on  the  tenth  digit.  If  the  tenth  digit  is  greater  than  or 
equal  to  5 the  number  will  be  rounded  upward.  Less  than  5 the  number 
will  be  rounded  downward.  This  could  be  important  to  the  final  totals  of 
some  numbers  you  may  want  to  work  with. 

Floating-point  numbers  are  stored  (using  five  bytes  of  memory)  and 
are  manipulated  in  calculations  with  ten  places  of  accuracy.  However, 
the  numbers  are  rounded  to  nine  digits  when  results  are  printed.  Some 
examples  of  simple  floating-point  numbers  are: 

1.23 

-.998877 
+ 3.1459 
.7777777 
-333. 

.01 

Numbers  smaller  than  .01  or  larger  than  999999999.  will  be  printed  in 
scientific  notation . In  scientific  notation  a floating-point  constant  is  made 
up  of  three  parts: 

1)  THE  MANTISSA 

2)  THE  LETTER  E 

3)  THE  EXPONENT 

The  mantissa  is  a simple  floating-point  number.  The  letter  E is  used  to 
tell  you  that  you're  seeing  the  number  in  exponential  form.  In  other 
words  E represents  *10  (eg.,  3E3  = 3*  1 0t3  = 3000).  And  the  exponent  is 
what  multiplication  power  of  10  the  number  is  raised  to. 

Both  the  mantissa  and  the  exponent  are  signed  (+  or  -)  numbers. 
The  exponent  s range  is  from  —39  to  +38  and  it  indicates  the  number  of 
places  that  the  actual  decimal  point  in  the  mantissa  would  be  moved  to 
the  left  ( — ) or  right  (+)  if  the  value  of  the  constant  were  represented  as 
a simple  number. 

There  is  a limit  to  the  size  of  floating-point  numbers  that  BASIC  can 
handle,  even  in  scientific  notation:  the  largest  number  is 
+ 1 .70141 1 83E  + 38  and  calculations  which  would  result  in  a larger 
number  will  display  the  BASIC  error  message  ?OVERFLOW  ERROR.  The 
smallest  floating-point  number  is  +2.93873588E-39  and  calculations 
which  result  in  a smaller  value  give  you  zero  as  an  answer  and  NO  error 
message.  Some  examples  of  floating-point  numbers  in  scientific  notation 
(and  their  decimal  values)  are: 


6 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


235.988E  — 3 
2359E6 
— 7.09E—  1 2 
-3.14159E  + 5 


(.235988) 

(2359000000.) 

(-.00000000000709) 

(-314159.) 


String  constants  are  groups  of  alphanumeric  information  like  letters, 
numbers  and  symbols.  When  you  enter  a string  from  the  keyboard,  it 
can  have  any  length  up  to  the  space  available  in  an  80-character  line 
(that  is,  any  character  spaces  NOT  taken  up  by  the  line  number  and 
other  required  parts  of  the  statement). 

A string  constant  can  contain  blanks,  letters,  numbers,  punctuation 
and  color  or  cursor  control  characters  in  any  combination.  You  can  even 
put  commas  between  numbers.  The  only  character  which  cannot  be  in- 
cluded in  a string  is  the  double  quote  mark  (") . This  is  because  the 
double  quote  mark  is  used  to  define  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  string. 
A string  can  also  have  a null  value — which  means  that  it  can  contain  no 
character  data.  You  can  leave  the  ending  quote  mark  off  of  a string  if 
ifs  the  last  item  on  a line  or  if  it's  followed  by  a colon  (:).  Some  exam- 
ples of  string  constants  are: 


( a null  string) 

"HELLO" 

"$25,000.00" 

"NUMBER  OF  EMPLOYEES' 


NOTE:  Use  CHR$(34)  to  include  quotes  (")  in  strings. 


INTEGER,  FLOATING-POINT  AND  STRING  VARIABLES 

Variables  are  names  that  represent  data  values  used  in  your  BASIC 
statements.  The  value  represented  by  a variable  can  be  assigned  by 
setting  it  equal  to  a constant,  or  it  can  be  the  result  of  calculations  in  the 
program.  Variable  data,  like  constants,  can  be  integers,  floating-point 
numbers,  or  strings.  If  you  refer  to  a variable  name  in  a program  before 
a value  has  been  assigned,  the  BASIC  Interpreter  will  automatically 
create  the  variable  with  a value  of  zero  if  it's  an  integer  or  floating-point 
number.  Or  it  will  create  a variable  with  a null  value  if  you're  using 
strings. 

Variable  names  can  be  any  length  but  only  the  first  two  characters 
are  considered  significant  in  CBM  BASIC.  This  means  that  all  names 
used  for  variables  must  NOT  have  the  same  first  two  characters.  Vari- 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES  7 


able  names  may  NOT  be  the  same  as  BASIC  keywords  and  they  may 
NOT  contain  keywords  in  the  middle  of  variable  names.  Keywords  in- 
clude all  BASIC  commands,  statements,  function  names  and  logical 
operator  names.  If  you  accidentally  use  a keyword  in  the  middle  of  a 
variable  name,  the  BASIC  error  message  ?SYNTAX  ERROR  will  show  up 
on  your  screen. 

The  characters  used  to  form  variable  names  are  the  alphabet  and  the 
numbers  0-9.  The  first  character  of  the  name  must  be  a letter.  Data 
type  declaration  characters  (%)  and  ($)  can  be  used  as  the  last  char- 
acter of  the  name.  The  percent  sign  (%)  declares  the  variable  to  be  an 
integer  and  the  dollar  sign  ($)  declares  a string  variable.  If  no  type 
declaration  character  is  used  the  Interpreter  will  assume  that  the  vari- 
able is  a floating-point.  Some  examples  of  variable  names,  value  as- 
signments and  data  types  are: 


A$="GROSS  SALES'7 
AATH$=/7JAN/7+A$ 
K%  =5 

CNT%  =CNT%  + 1 

FP=  12.5 

SUAA  = FP*CNT% 


(string  variable) 

(string  variable) 

(integer  variable) 
(integer  variable) 
(floating-point  variable) 
(floating-point  variable) 


INTEGER,  FLOATING-POINT  AND  STRING  ARRAYS 

An  array  is  a table  (or  list)  of  associated  data  items  referred  to  by  a 
single  variable  name.  In  other  words,  an  array  is  a sequence  of  related 
variables.  A table  of  numbers  can  be  seen  as  an  array,  for  example. 
The  individual  numbers  within  the  table  become  "elements77  of  the 
array. 

Arrays  are  a useful  shorthand  way  of  describing  a large  number  of 
related  variables.  Take  a table  of  numbers  for  instance.  Let's  say  that 
the  table  has  10  rows  of  numbers  with  20  numbers  in  each  row.  That 
makes  a total  of  200  numbers  in  the  table.  Without  a single  array  name 
to  call  on  you  would  have  to  assign  a unique  name  to  each  value  in  the 
table.  But  because  you  can  use  arrays  you  only  need  one  name  for  the 
array  and  all  the  elements  in  the  array  are  identified  by  their  individual 
locations  within  the  array. 

Array  names  can  be  integers,  floating-points  or  string  data  types  and 
all  elements  in  the  array  have  the  same  data  type  as  the  array  name. 
Arrays  can  have  a single  dimension  (as  in  a simple  list)  or  they  can  have 
multiple  dimensions  (imagine  a grid  marked  in  rows  and  columns  or  a 


8 BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


Rubik's  Cube®).  Each  element  of  an  array  is  uniquely  identified  and  re- 
ferred to  by  a subscript  (or  index  variable)  following  the  array  name, 
enclosed  within  parentheses  ( ). 

The  maximum  number  of  dimensions  an  array  can  have  in  theory  is 
255  and  the  number  of  elements  in  each  dimension  is  limited  to  32767. 
But  for  practical  purposes  array  sizes  are  limited  by  the  memory  space 
available  to  hold  their  data  and/or  the  80  character  logical  screen  line. 
If  an  array  has  only  one  dimension  and  its  subscript  value  will  never 
exceed  10  (11  items:  0 thru  10)  then  the  array  will  be  created  by  the 
Interpreter  and  filled  with  zeros  (or  nulls  if  string  type)  the  first  time  any 
element  of  the  array  is  referred  to,  otherwise  the  BASIC  DIM  statement 
must  be  used  to  define  the  shape  and  size  of  the  array.  The  amount  of 
memory  required  to  store  an  array  can  be  determined  as  follows: 

5 bytes  for  the  array  name 
+ 2 bytes  for  each  dimension  of  the  array 
+ 2 bytes  per  element  for  integers 
OR  + 5 bytes  per  element  for  floating-point 
OR  + 3 bytes  per  element  for  strings 
AND  -f  1 byte  per  character  in  each  string  element 

Subscripts  can  be  integer  constants,  variables,  or  an  arithmetic  ex- 
pression which  gives  an  integer  result.  Separate  subscripts,  with  com- 
mas between  them,  are  required  for  each  dimension  of  an  array.  Sub- 
scripts can  have  values  from  zero  up  to  the  number  of  elements  in  the 
respective  dimensions  of  the  array.  Values  outside  that  range  will  cause 
the  BASIC  error  message  ?BAD  SUBSCRIPT.  Some  examples  of  array 
names,  value  assignments  and  data  types  are: 

A$(0)=//GROSS  SALES"  (string  array) 

MTH$(K%)  = /,JAN//  (string  array) 

G2%(X)  = 5 (integer  array) 

CNT%(G2%(X))  = CNT%(1)  — 2 (integer  array) 

FP(1 2*K%)  = 24.8  (floating-point  array) 

SUM(CNT%(l))  = FP/fK%  (floating-point  array) 

A(5)  0 (sets  the  5th  element  in  the  1 dimensional 

array  called  " A " equal  to  0) 

B(5,6)=0  (sets  the  element  in  row  position  5 and 

column  position  6 in  the  2 dimensional  array 
called  "B"  equal  to  0) 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES  9 


C(l,2,3)=0  (sets  the  element  in  row  position  1,  column 
position  2,  and  depth  position  3 in  the 
3 dimensional  array  called  "C"  equal  to  0) 


EXPRESSIONS  AND  OPERATORS 

Expressions  are  formed  using  constants,  variables  and/or  arrays.  An 
expression  can  be  a single  constant,  simple  variable,  or  an  array  vari- 
able of  any  type.  It  can  also  be  a combination  of  constants  and  vari- 
ables with  arithmetic,  relational  or  logical  operators  designed  to 
produce  a single  value.  How  operators  work  is  explained  below.  Ex- 
pressions can  be  separated  into  two  classes: 

1)  ARITHMETIC 

2)  STRING 

Expressions  are  normally  thought  of  as  having  two  or  more  data  items 
called  operands.  Each  operand  is  separated  by  a single  operator  to 
produce  the  desired  result.  This  is  usually  done  by  assigning  the  value  of 
the  expression  to  a variable  name.  All  of  the  examples  of  constants  and 
variables  that  you've  seen  so  far,  were  also  examples  of  expressions. 

An  operator  is  a special  symbol  the  BASIC  Interpreter  in  your  Com- 
modore 64  recognizes  as  representing  an  operation  to  be  performed  on 
the  variables  or  constant  data.  One  or  more  operators,  combined  with 
one  or  more  variables  and/or  constants  form  an  expression.  Arithmetic, 
relational  and  logical  operators  are  recognized  by  Commodore  64 
BASIC. 

ARITHMETIC  EXPRESSIONS 

Arithmetic  expressions,  when  solved,  will  give  an  integer  or  floating- 
point value.  The  arithmetic  operators  (+,  -,  *,  /,  t)  are  used  to  Perform 
addition,  subtraction,  multiplication,  division  and  exponentiation  opera- 
tions respectively. 

ARITHMETIC  OPERATIONS 

An  arithmetic  operator  defines  an  arithmetic  operation  which  is  per- 
formed on  the  two  operands  on  either  side  of  the  operator.  Arithmetic 
operations  are  performed  using  floating-point  numbers.  Integers  are 


10  BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


converted  to  floating-point  numbers  before  an  arithmetic  operation  is 
performed.  The  result  is  converted  back  to  an  integer  if  it  is  assigned  to 
an  integer  variable  name. 

ADDITION  ( + ):  The  plus  sign  (+)  specifies  that  the  operand  on  the 
right  is  added  to  the  operand  on  the  left. 

EXAMPLES: 

2+2 
A+B+C 
X%  + 1 
BR+10E-2 

SUBTRACTION  (-);  The  minus  sign  (-)  specifies  that  the  operand  on 
the  right  is  subtracted  from  the  operand  on  the  left. 

EXAMPLES: 

4-1 

100-64 

A-B 

55-142 


The  minus  can  also  be  used  as  a unary  minus.  That  means  that  it  is 
the  minus  sign  in  front  of  a negative  number.  This  is  equal  to  subtracting 
the  number  from  zero  (0). 

EXAMPLES: 

-5 
— 9E4 
-B 

4—  ( — 2)  same  as  4 + 2 

MULTIPLICATION  ( ):  An  asterisk  (*)  specifies  that  the  operand  on  the 
left  is  multiplied  by  the  operand  on  the  right. 

EXAMPLES: 

100*2 
50*0 
A*X1 
R%*  1 4 

DIVISION  (/):  The  slash  (/)  specifies  that  the  operand  on  the  left  is 
divided  by  the  operand  on  the  right. 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


11 


EXAMPLES: 


10/2 

6400/4 

A/B 

4E2/XR 


EXPONENTIATION  (f):  The  up  arrow  (f)  specifies  that  the  operand  on 
the  left  is  raised  to  the  power  specified  by  the  operand  on  the  right  (the 
exponent).  If  the  operand  on  the  right  is  a 2,  the  number  on  the  left  is 
squared;  if  the  exponent  is  a 3,  the  number  on  the  left  is  cubed,  etc.  The 
exponent  can  be  any  number  so  long  as  the  result  of  the  operation  gives 
a valid  floating-point  number. 


EXAMPLES: 


2\2  Equivalent  to:  2*2 

3f3  Equivalent  to:  3*3*3 

4|4  Equivalent  to:  4*4*4*4 

ABfCD 

3f  — 2 Equivalent  to:  !/3*!/3 


RELATIONAL  OPERATORS 


The  relational  operators  (<,  =,  >,  < = , > = , <>)  are  primarily  used 
to  compare  the  values  of  two  operands,  but  they  also  produce  an  arith- 
metic result.  The  relational  operators  and  the  logical  operators  (AND, 
OR,  and  NOT),  when  used  in  comparisons,  actually  produce  an  arith- 
metic true/false  evaluation  of  an  expression.  If  the  relationship  stated  in 
the  expression  is  true  the  result  is  assigned  an  integer  value  of  -1  and  if 
ifs  false  a value  of  0 is  assigned.  These  are  the  relational  operators: 


< LESS  THAN 

= EQUAL  TO 

> GREATER  THAN 
<=  LESS  THAN  OR  EQUAL  TO 
>=  GREATER  THAN  OR  EQUAL  TO 
<>  NOT  EQUAL  TO 


EXAMPLES: 


1=5-4 
14>66 
15>  = 15 


result  true  (—  1 ) 
result  false  (0) 
result  true  (—  1 ) 


12 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


Relational  operators  can  be  used  to  compare  strings.  For  comparison 
purposes,  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  have  the  order  A<B<C<D,  etc. 
Strings  are  compared  by  evaluating  the  relationship  between  corre- 
sponding characters  from  left  to  right  (see  String  Operations). 

EXAMPLES: 

"A"  < "B"  result  true  (-1) 

"X"  = "YY"  result  false  (0) 

BB$  <>  CC$ 

Numeric  data  items  can  only  be  compared  (or  assigned)  to  other 
numeric  items.  The  same  is  true  when  comparing  strings,  otherwise  the 
BASIC  error  message  ?TYPE  MISMATCH  will  occur.  Numeric  operands 
are  compared  by  first  converting  the  values  of  either  or  both  operands 
from  integer  to  floating-point  form,  as  necessary.  Then  the  relationship 
of  the  floating-point  values  is  evaluated  to  give  a true/false  result. 

At  the  end  of  all  comparisons,  you  get  an  integer  no  matter  what 
data  type  the  operand  is  (even  if  both  are  strings).  Because  of  this,  a 
comparison  of  two  operands  can  be  used  as  an  operand  in  performing 
calculations.  The  result  will  be  — 1 or  0 and  can  be  used  as  anything  but 
a divisor,  since  division  by  zero  is  illegal. 

LOGICAL  OPERATORS 

The  logical  operators  (AND,  OR,  NOT)  can  be  used  to  modify  the 
meanings  of  the  relational  operators  or  to  produce  an  arithmetic  result. 
Logical  operators  can  produce  results  other  than  -1  and  0,  though  any 
nonzero  result  is  considered  true  when  testing  for  a true/false  condition. 

The  logical  operators  (sometimes  called  Boolean  operators)  can  also 
be  used  to  perform  logic  operations  on  individual  binary  digits  (bits)  in 
two  operands.  But  when  you're  using  the  NOT  operator,  the  operation  is 
performed  only  on  the  single  operand  to  the  right.  The  operands  must 
be  in  the  integer  range  of  values  (-32768  to  +32767)  (floating-point 
numbers  are  converted  to  integers)  and  logical  operations  give  an  in- 
teger result. 

Logical  operations  are  performed  bit-by-corresponding-bit  on  the  two 
operands.  The  logical  AND  produces  a bit  result  of  1 only  if  both 
operand  bits  are  1.  The  logical  OR  produces  a bit  result  of  1 if  either 
operand  bit  is  1.  The  logical  NOT  is  the  opposite  value  of  each  bit  as  a 
single  operand.  In  other  words,  it's  really  saying,  "If  it's  NOT  1 then  it  is 
0.  If  it's  NOT  0 then  it  is  1 ." 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


13 


The  exclusive  OR  (XOR)  doesn't  have  a logical  operator  but  it  is  per- 
formed as  part  of  the  WAIT  statement.  Exclusive  OR  means  that  if  the  bits  of 
two  operands  are  equal  then  the  result  is  0 otherwise  the  result  is  1. 

Logical  operations  are  defined  by  groups  of  statements  which,  taken 
together,  constitute  a Boolean  "truth  table"  as  shown  in  Table  1-2. 

Table  1-2.  Boolean  Truth  Table 

The  AND  operation  results  in  a 1 only  if  both  bits  are  1: 

1 AND  1 = 1 

0 AND  1 = 0 

1 AND  0 = 0 
0 AND  0 = 0 

The  OR  operation  results  in  a 1 if  either  bit  is  1: 

1 OR  1 = 1 

0 OR  1 = 1 

1 OR  0 = 1 

0 OR  0 = 0 

The  NOT  operation  logically  complements  each  bit: 

NOT  1 = 0 
NOT  0 = 1 

The  exclusive  OR  (XOR)  is  part  of  the  WAIT  statement: 

1 XOR  1 = 0 
1 XOR  0 = 1 
0 XOR  1 = 1 
0 XOR  0 = 0 


The  logical  operators  AND,  OR  and  NOT  specify  a Boolean  arithmetic 
operation  to  be  performed  on  the  two  operand  expressions  on  either 
side  of  the  operator.  In  the  case  of  NOT,  ONLY  the  operand  on  the 
RIGHT  is  considered.  Logical  operations  (or  Boolean  arithmetic)  aren't 
performed  until  all  arithmetic  and  relational  operations  in  an  expression 
have  been  completed. 


14 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


EXAMPLES: 

IF  A=  1 00  AND  B=  1 00  THEN  10 

A=96  AND  32:  PRINT  A 
IF  A=  1 00  OR  B = 100  THEN  20 

A=64  OR  32:  PRINT  A 
IF  NOT  X<Y  THEN  30 
X=  NOT  96 


(if  both  A and  B have  a value 
of  100  then  the  result  is 
true) 

(A  = 32) 

(if  A or  B is  100  then  the 
result  is  true) 

(A  = 96) 

(if  X>  = Y the  result  is  true) 

(result  is  —97  (two's  complement)) 


HIERARCHY  OF  OPERATIONS 

All  expressions  perform  the  different  types  of  operations  according  to 
a fixed  hierarchy.  In  other  words,  certain  operations  are  performed  be- 
fore other  operations.  The  normal  order  of  operations  can  be  modified 
by  enclosing  two  or  more  operands  within  parentheses  ( ),  creating  a 
"subexpression."  The  parts  of  an  expression  enclosed  in  parentheses  will 
be  reduced  to  a single  value  before  working  on  parts  outside  the  par- 
entheses. 

When  you  use  parentheses  in  expressions,  they  must  be  paired  so  that 
you  always  have  an  equal  number  of  left  and  right  parentheses. 
Otherwise,  the  BASIC  error  message  ?SYNTAX  ERROR  will  appear. 

Expressions  which  have  operands  inside  parentheses  may  themselves 
be  enclosed  in  parentheses,  forming  complex  expressions  of  multiple 
levels.  This  is  called  nesting.  Parentheses  can  be  nested  in  expressions 
to  a maximum  depth  of  ten  levels — ten  matching  sets  of  parentheses. 
The  inner-most  expression  has  its  operations  performed  first.  Some 
examples  of  expressions  are: 

A+B 

Cf(D+E)/2 

((X-Ct(D+E)/2)*10)+l 

GG$>HH$ 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


15 


JJ$+"MORE" 

K%  = 1 AND  M <>X 

K%  =2  OR  (A=B  AND  M<X) 

NOT  (D=E) 

The  BASIC  Interpreter  will  normally  perform  operations  on  expressions 
by  performing  arithmetic  operations  first,  then  relational  operations,  and 
logical  operations  last.  Both  arithmetic  and  logical  operators  have  an 
order  of  precedence  (or  hierarchy  of  operations)  within  themselves.  On 
the  other  hand,  relational  operators  do  not  have  an  order  of  precedence 
and  will  be  performed  as  the  expression  is  evaluated  from  left  to  right. 

If  all  remaining  operators  in  an  expression  have  the  same  level  of 
precedence  then  operations  happen  from  left  to  right.  When  performing 
operations  on  expressions  within  parentheses,  the  normal  order  of  pre- 
cedence is  maintained.  The  hierarchy  of  arithmetic  and  logical  opera- 
tions is  shown  in  Table  1-3  from  first  to  last  in  order  of  precedence. 


Table  1-3.  Hierarchy  of  Operations  Performed  on  Expressions 


OPERATOR 

DESCRIPTION 

EXAMPLE 

t 

Exponentiation 

BASE  | EXP 

- 

Negation  (Unary  Minus) 

-A 

*/ 

Multiplication 

AB  * CD 

Division 

EF  / GH 

+ - 

Addition 

CNT  + 2 

Subtraction 

JK  - PQ 

> = < 

Relational  Operations 

A <=  B 

NOT 

Logical  NOT 

(Integer  Two's  Complement) 

NOT  K% 

AND 

Logical  AND 

JK  AND  128 

OR 

Logical  OR 

PQ  OR  15 

STRING  OPERATIONS 

Strings  are  compared  using  the  same  relational  operators  ( = , <>, 


16  BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


< = , > = , <,  >)  that  are  used  for  comparing  numbers.  String  compari- 
sons are  made  by  taking  one  character  at  a time  (left-to-rig ht)  from 
each  string  and  evaluating  each  character  code  position  from  the  PET / 
CBM  character  set.  If  the  character  codes  are  the  same,  the  characters 
are  equal.  If  the  character  codes  differ,  the  character  with  the  lower 
code  number  is  lower  in  the  character  set.  The  comparison  stops  when 
the  end  of  either  string  is  reached.  All  other  things  being  equal,  the 
shorter  string  is  considered  less  than  the  longer  string.  Leading  or  trail- 
ing blanks  ARE  significant. 

Regardless  of  the  data  types,  at  the  end  of  all  comparisons  you  get 
an  integer  result.  This  is  true  even  if  both  operands  are  strings.  Because 
of  this  a comparison  of  two  string  operands  can  be  used  as  an  operand 
in  performing  calculations.  The  result  will  be  — 1 or  0 (true  or  false)  and 
can  be  used  as  anything  but  a divisor  since  division  by  zero  is  illegal. 

STRING  EXPRESSIONS 

Expressions  are  treated  as  if  an  implied  "<>0"  follows  them.  This 
means  that  if  an  expression  is  true  then  the  next  BASIC  statements  on 
the  same  program  line  are  executed.  If  the  expression  is  false  the  rest  of 
the  line  is  ignored  and  the  next  line  in  the  program  is  executed. 

Just  as  with  numbers,  you  can  also  perform  operations  on  string  vari- 
ables. The  only  string  arithmetic  operator  recognized  by  CBM  BASIC  is 
the  plus  sign  ( + ) which  is  used  to  perform  concatenation  of  strings. 
When  strings  are  concatenated,  the  string  on  the  right  of  the  plus  sign  is 
appended  to  the  string  on  the  left,  forming  a third  string  as  a result.  The 
result  can  be  printed  immediately,  used  in  a comparison,  or  assigned  to 
a variable  name.  If  a string  data  item  is  compared  with  (or  set  equal  to) 
a numeric  item,  or  vice-versa,  the  BASIC  error  message  ?TYPE  MIS- 
MATCH will  occur.  Some  examples  of  string  expressions  and  concatena- 
tion are: 

10  A$=//FILE//  : B$=//NAME// 

20  NAM$  = A$  + B$  (gives  the  string:  FILENAME) 

30  RES$  = "NEW  " + A$  + B$  (gives  the  string:  NEW  FILENAME) 

I Note  space  here. 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


17 


PROGRAMMING  TECHNIQUES 

DATA  CONVERSIONS 


When  necessary,  the  CBM  BASIC  Interpreter  will  convert  a numeric 
data  item  from  an  integer  to  floating-point,  or  vice-versa,  according  to 
the  following  rules: 

• All  arithmetic  and  relational  operations  are  performed  in  floating- 
point format.  Integers  are  converted  to  floating-point  form  for 
evaluation  of  the  expression,  and  the  result  is  converted  back  to 
integer.  Logical  operations  convert  their  operands  to  integers  and 
return  an  integer  result. 

• If  a numeric  variable  name  of  one  type  is  set  equal  to  a numeric 
data  item  of  a different  type,  the  number  will  be  converted  and 
stored  as  the  data  type  declared  in  the  variable  name. 

• When  a floating-point  value  is  converted  to  an  integer,  the  frac- 
tional portion  is  truncated  (eliminated)  and  the  integer  result  is  less 
than  or  equal  to  the  floating-point  value.  If  the  result  is  outside  the 
range  of  +32767  thru  -32768,  the  BASIC  error  message  ?ILLEGAL 
QUANTITY  will  occur. 


USING  THE  INPUT  STATEMENT 


Now  that  you  know  what  variables  are,  let's  take  that  information  and 
put  it  together  with  the  INPUT  statement  for  some  practical  program- 
ming applications. 

In  our  first  example,  you  can  think  of  a variable  as  a "storage  com- 
partment" where  the  Commodore  64  stores  the  user's  response  to  your 
prompt  question.  To  write  a program  which  asks  the  user  to  type  in  a 
name,  you  might  assign  the  variable  N$  to  the  name  typed  in.  Now 
every  time  you  PRINT  N$  in  your  program,  the  Commodore  64  will 
automatically  PRINT  the  name  that  the  user  typed  in. 

Type  the  word  NEW  on  your  Commodore  64.  Hit  the  key, 

and  try  this  example: 


10  PRINT  "YOUR  NAME":  IN  PUT  N$ 
20  PRINT  "HELLO,"  N$ 


18 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


In  this  example  you  used  N to  remind  yourself  that  this  variable  stands 
for  "NAME."  The  dollar  sign  ($)  is  used  to  tell  the  computer  that  you're 
using  a string  variable.  It  is  important  to  differentiate  between  the  two 
types  of  variables: 

1)  NUMERIC 

2)  STRING 

You  probably  remember  from  the  earlier  sections  that  numeric  vari- 
ables are  used  to  store  number  values  such  as  1,  100,  4000,  etc.  A 
numeric  variable  can  be  a single  letter  (A),  any  two  letters  (AB),  a letter 
and  a number  (Al),  or  two  letters  and  a number  (AB1).  You  can  save 
memory  space  by  using  shorter  variables.  Another  helpful  hint  is  to  use 
letters  and  numbers  for  different  categories  in  the  same  program  (Al, 
A2,  A3).  Also,  if  you  want  whole  numbers  for  an  answer  instead  of 
numbers  with  decimal  points,  all  you  have  to  do  is  put  a percent  sign 
(%)  at  the  end  of  your  variable  name  (AB%,  Al%,  etc.) 

Now  let's  look  at  a few  examples  that  use  different  types  of  variables 
and  expressions  with  the  INPUT  statement. 

10  PRINT  "ENTER  A NUMBER":INPUT  A 

20  PRINT  A 

10  PRINT  "ENTER  A WORD":INPUT  A$ 

20  PRINT  A$ 

10  PRINT  "ENTER  A NUMBER":INPUT  A 

20  PRINT  A "TIMES  5 EQUALS"  A*5 


NOTE:  Example  3 shows  that  MESSAGES  or  PROMPTS  are  inside  the  quotation 
marks  ("  ")  while  the  variables  are  outside.  Notice,  too,  that  in  line  20  the  variable  A 
was  printed  first,  then  the  message  “TIMES  5 EQUALS",  and  then  the  calculation, 
multiply  variable  A by  5 (A *5). 


Calculations  are  important  in  most  programs.  You  have  a choice  of 
using  "actual  numbers"  or  variables  when  doing  calculations,  but  if 
you're  working  with  numbers  supplied  by  a user  you  must  use  numeric 
variables.  Begin  by  asking  the  user  to  type  in  two  numbers  like  this: 

10  PRINT  "TYPE  2 NUMBERS":INPUT  ArINPUT  B 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


19 


INCOME/EXPENSE  BUDGET  EXAMPLE 


5 PRINT 

10  PRINT "MONTHLY  INCOME" : INPUT  IN 
28  PRINT 

30  PR I NT " EXPENSE  CATEGORY  1 " : INPUT 
48  PR I NT "EXPENSE  AMOUNT" : INPUT  El 
50  PRINT 

60  PRINT" EXPENSE  CATEGORY  2" : INPUT 
78  PR I NT "EXPENSE  AMOUNT" : INPUT  E2 
88  PRINT 

98  PR I NT "EXPENSE  CATEGORY  3" : INPUT 
100  PR I NT "EXPENSE  AMOUNT" : INPUT  E3 
110  PRINT 
120  E=E 1 +E2+E3 
138  EP=E/IN 


El* 

E2$ 

E3$ 


140  PR I NT "MONTHLY  INCOME:  *"IN 
ISO  PR I NT "TOTAL  EXPENSES : $"E 
160  PR I NT "BALANCE  EQUALS : *"IN-E 
170  PRINT 

180  PRINT  El*"55" <E 1/E 1 80" X OF  TOTAL  EXPENSES" 
190  PRINT  E2* " ~ " < E2/E > :M  1 00 " X OF  TOTAL  EXPENSES" 
200  F‘R I NTE3* " ~ " < E3/E > # 1 00 " X OF  TOTAL  EXPENSES" 
210  PRINT 


228  PR  I NT  " YOUR  EXPENSES55  " EP*  1 08  " X 
INCOME" 


238  FOR  X® 1 TO 50 00 : NEXT : PR I NT 
240  PR I NT "REPEAT?  <Y  OR  N>": INPUT 
258  PRINT  "3": END 


OF  YOUR  TOTAL 


V$:IF  Y$~"Y"THEN5 


^OTE:  IN  can  NOT  = 0,  and  El,  E2,  E3  can  NOT  all  be  0 at  the  same  time. 


20 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


LINE-BY-LINE  EXPLANATION  OF 

INCOME/EXPENSE  BUDGET  EXAMPLE 

Line(s) 

Description 

5 

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

70 

80 

90 

100 

110 

120 

130 

140 

150 

160 

170 

180-200 

Clears  the  screen. 

PRINT/INPUT  statement. 

Inserts  blank  line. 

Expense  Category  1 = El$. 

Expense  Amount  = El. 

Inserts  blank  line. 

Expense  Category  2 = E2$. 

Expense  Amount  2 = E2. 

Inserts  blank  line. 

Expense  Category  3 = E3$. 

Expense  Amount  3 = E3. 

Clears  the  screen. 

Add  Expense  Amounts  = E. 

Calculate  Expense/lncome% . 

Display  Income. 

Display  Total  Expenses. 

Display  Income  — Expenses. 

Inserts  blank  line. 

Lines  180-200  calculate  % each  expense 
amount  is  of  total  expenses. 

210 

220 

230 

Inserts  blank  line. 

Display  E/l  %. 

Time  delay  loop. 

Now  multiply  those  two  numbers  together  to  create  a new  variable  C as 
shown  in  line  20  below: 

20  C=A*B 

To  PRINT  the  result  as  a message  type 

30  PRINT  A "TIMES"  B "EQUALS"  C 

Enter  these  3 lines  and  RUN  the  program.  Notice  that  the  messages  are 
inside  the  quotes  while  the  variables  are  not. 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


21 


Now  let's  say  that  you  wanted  a dollar  sign  ($)  in  front  of  the  number 
represented  by  variable  C.  The  $ must  be  PRINTed  inside  quotes  and  in 
front  of  variable  C.  To  add  the  $ to  your  program  hit  the 
and  keys.  Now  type  in  line  40  as  follows: 

40  PRINT  "$"  C 

Now  hit  , type  RUN  and  hit  again. 

The  dollar  sign  goes  in  quotes  because  the  variable  C only  represents 
a number  and  can't  contain  a $.  If  the  number  represented  by  C was 
100  then  the  Commodore  64  screen  would  display  $ 100.  But,  if  you 
tried  to  PRINT  $C  without  using  the  quotes,  you  would  get  a ?SYNTAX 
ERROR  message. 

One  last  tip  about  $$$:  You  can  create  a variable  that  represents  a 
dollar  sign  which  you  can  then  substitute  for  the  $ when  you  want  to  use 
it  with  numeric  variables.  For  example: 


10  Z$="$" 


Now  whenever  you  need  a dollar  sign  you  can  use  the  string  variable 
Z$.  Try  this: 

10  Z$="$//:INPUT  A 
20  PRINT  Z$A 


Line  10  defines  the  $ as  a string  variable  called  Z$,  and  then  INPUTs  a 
number  called  A.  Line  20  PRINTs  Z$  ($)  next  to  A (number). 

You'll  probably  find  that  it's  easier  to  assign  certain  characters,  like 
dollar  signs,  to  a string  variable  than  to  type  "$"  every  time  you  want  to 
calculate  dollars  or  other  items  which  require  " " like  %. 


USING  THE  GET  STATEMENT 

Most  simple  programs  use  the  INPUT  statement  to  get  data  from  the 
person  operating  the  computer.  When  you're  dealing  v/ith  more  complex 
needs,  like  protection  from  typing  errors,  the  GET  statement  gives  you 
more  flexibility  and  your  program  more  "intelligence."  This  section  shows 
you  how  to  use  the  GET  statement  to  add  some  special  screen  editing 
features  to  your  programs. 


22 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


The  Commodore  64  has  a keyboard  buffer  that  holds  up  to  10  char- 
acters. This  means  that  if  the  computer  is  busy  doing  some  operation 
and  it's  not  reading  the  keyboard,  you  can  still  type  in  up  to  10  char- 
acters, which  will  be  used  as  soon  as  the  Commodore  64  finishes  what  it 
was  doing.  To  demonstrate  this,  type  in  this  program  on  your  Commo- 
dore 64: 

NEW 

10  Tl$ ="000000" 

20  IF  Tl$  < "000015"  THEN  20 

Now  type  RUN,  hit  anc*  w^e  the  program  is  RUNning  type 

in  the  word  HELLO. 

Notice  that  nothing  happened  for  about  15  seconds  when  the  pro- 
gram started.  Only  then  did  the  message  HELLO  appear  on  the  screen. 

Imagine  standing  in  line  for  a movie.  The  first  person  in  the  line  is  the 
first  to  get  a ticket  and  leave  the  line.  The  last  person  in  line  is  last  for  a 
ticket.  The  GET  statement  acts  like  a ticket  taker.  First  it  looks  to  see  if 
there  are  any  characters  "in  line."  In  other  words  have  any  keys  been 
typed.  If  the  answer  is  yes  then  that  character  gets  placed  in  the  ap- 
propriate variable.  If  no  key  was  pressed  then  an  empty  value  is  as- 
signed to  a variable. 

At  this  point  it's  important  to  note  that  if  you  try  to  put  more  than  10 
characters  into  the  buffer  at  one  time,  all  those  over  the  10th  character 
will  be  lost. 

Since  the  GET  statement  will  keep  going  even  when  no  character  is 
typed,  it  is  often  necessary  to  put  the  GET  statement  into  a loop  so  that  it 
will  have  to  wait  until  someone  hits  a key  or  until  a character  is  received 
through  your  program. 

Below  is  the  recommended  form  for  the  GET  statement.  Type  NEW  to 
erase  your  previous  program. 

10  GET  A$  : IF  A$  = ""  THEN  10 

Notice  that  there  is  NO  SPACE  between  the  quote  marks  ("")  on  this  line. 
This  indicates  an  empty  value  and  sends  the  program  back  to  the  GET 
statement  in  a continuous  loop  until  someone  hits  a key  on  the  computer. 
Once  a key  is  hit  the  program  will  continue  with  the  line  following  line 
10.  Add  this  line  to  your  program: 

100  PRINT  A$;:  GOTO  10 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


23 


Now  RUN  the  program.  Notice  that  no  cursor  ■ appears  on  the  screen, 
but  any  character  you  type  will  be  printed  in  the  screen.  This  2-line 
program  can  be  turned  into  part  of  a screen  editor  program  as  shown 


below. 

There  are  many  things  you  can  do  with  a screen  editor.  You  can  have 
a flashing  cursor.  You  can  keep  certain  keys  like  from 

accidentally  erasing  the  whole  screen.  You  might  even  want  to  be  able 
to  use  your  function  keys  to  represent  whole  words  or  phrases.  And 
speaking  of  function  keys,  the  following  program  lines  give  each  func- 
tion key  a special  purpose.  Remember  this  is  only  the  beginning  of  a 
program  that  you  can  customize  for  your  needs. 


20  IF  A$  = CHR$(133)  THEN  POKE  53280,8:GOTO  10 
30  IF  A$  = CHR$(134)  THEN  POKE  53281,4:GOTO  10 
40  IF  A$  = CHR$(135)  THEN  A$="DEAR  SIR:"+CHR$(13) 

50  IF  A$  = CHR$(136)  THEN  A$="SINCERELY,"+CHR$(13) 

The  CHR$  numbers  in  parentheses  come  from  the  CHR$  code  chart  in 
Appendix  C.  The  chart  lists  a different  number  for  each  character  The 
four  function  keys  are  set  up  to  perform  the  tasks  represented  by  the 
instructions  that  follow  the  word  THEN  in  each  line.  By  changing  the 
CHR$  number  inside  each  set  of  parentheses  you  can  designate  differ- 
ent keys.  Different  instructions  would  be  performed  if  you  changed  the 
information  after  the  THEN  statement. 


HOW  TO  CRUNCH  BASIC  PROGRAMS 

You  can  pack  more  instructions — and  power — into  your  BASIC  pro- 
grams by  making  each  program  as  short  as  possible.  This  process  of 
shortening  programs  is  called  "crunching." 

Crunching  programs  lets  you  squeeze  the  maximum  possible  number 
of  instructions  into  your  program.  It  also  helps  you  reduce  the  size  of 
programs  which  might  not  otherwise  run  in  a given  size;  and  if  you're 
writing  a program  which  requires  the  input  of  data  such  as  inventory 
items,  numbers  or  text,  a short  program  will  leave  more  memory  space 
free  to  hold  data. 

ABBREVIATING  KEYWORDS 

A list  of  keyword  abbreviations  is  given  in  Appendix  A.  This  is  helpful 
when  you  program  because  you  can  actually  crowd  more  information  on 
each  line  using  abbreviations.  The  most  frequently  used  abbreviation  is 


24 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


the  question  mark  (?)  which  is  the  BASIC  abbreviation  for  the  PRINT 
command.  However,  if  you  LIST  a program  that  has  abbreviations,  the 
Commodore  64  will  automatically  print  out  the  listing  with  the  full-length 
keywords.  If  any  program  line  exceeds  80  characters  (2  lines  on  the 
screen)  with  the  keywords  unabbreviated,  and  you  want  to  change  it, 
you  will  have  to  re-enter  that  line  with  the  abbreviations  before  saving 
the  program.  SAVEing  a program  incorporates  the  keywords  without 
inflating  any  lines  because  BASIC  keywords  are  tokenized  by  the  Com- 
modore 64.  Usually,  abbreviations  are  added  after  a program  is  written 
and  it  isn't  going  to  be  LISTed  any  more  before  SAVEing. 

SHORTENING  PROGRAM  LINE  NUMBERS 

Most  programmers  start  their  programs  at  line  100  and  number  each 
line  at  intervals  of  10  (i.e.,  100,  110,  120).  This  allows  extra  lines  of 
instruction  to  be  added  (111,  112,  etc.)  as  the  program  is  developed. 
One  means  of  crunching  the  program  after  it  is  completed  is  to  change 
the  line  numbers  to  the  lowest  numbers  possible  (i.e.,  1,  2,  3)  because 
longer  line  numbers  take  more  memory  than  shorter  numbers  when  ref- 
erenced by  GOTO  and  GOSUB  statements.  For  instance,  the  number  100 
uses  3 bytes  of  memory  (one  for  each  number)  while  the  number  1 uses 
only  1 byte. 

PUTTING  MULTIPLE  INSTRUCTIONS  ON  EACH  LINE 

You  can  put  more  than  one  instruction  on  each  numbered  line  in  your 
program  by  separating  them  by  a colon.  The  only  limitation  is  that  all 
the  instructions  on  each  line,  including  colons,  should  not  exceed  the 
standard  80-character  line  length.  Here  is  an  example  of  two  programs, 
before  and  after  crunching: 

BEFORE  CRUNCHING:  AFTER  CRUNCHING: 

10  PRINT  "HELLO.  . 10  PRINT  "HELLO  . . ";:FORT=lTO 

20  FOR  T = 1 TO  500: NEXT  500:NEXT:PRINT"HELLO, 

30  PRINT  "HELLO,  AGAIN  . . " AGAIN  . . ":GOTO10 

40  GOTO  10 

REMOVING  REM  STATEMENTS 

REM  statements  are  helpful  in  reminding  yourself — or  showing  other 
programmers — what  a particular  section  of  a program  is  doing.  How- 
ever, when  the  program  is  completed  and  ready  to  use,  you  probably 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES  25 


won't  need  those  REM  statements  anymore  and  you  can  save  quite  a bit 
of  space  by  removing  the  REM  statements.  If  you  plan  to  revise  or  study 
the  program  structure  in  the  future,  it's  a good  idea  to  keep  a copy  on 
file  with  the  REM  statements  intact. 

USING  VARIABLES 

If  a number,  word  or  sentence  is  used  repeatedly  in  your  program  it's 
usually  best  to  define  those  long  words  or  numbers  with  a one  or  two 
letter  variable.  Numbers  can  be  defined  as  single  letters.  Words  and 
sentences  can  be  defined  as  string  variables  using  a letter  and  dollar 
sign.  Here's  one  example: 

BEFORE  CRUNCHING: 

10  POKE  54296,15 
20  POKE  54276,33 
30  POKE  54273,10 
40  POKE  54273,40 
50  POKE  54273,70 
60  POKE  54296,0 

USING  READ  AND  DATA  STATEMENTS 

Large  amounts  of  data  can  be  typed  in  as  one  piece  of  data  at  a 
time,  over  and  over  again  ...  or  you  can  print  the  instructional  part  of 
the  program  ONCE  and  print  all  the  data  to  be  handled  in  a long  run- 
ning list  called  the  DATA  statement.  This  is  especially  good  for  crowding 
large  lists  of  numbers  into  a program. 

USING  ARRAYS  AND  MATRICES 

Arrays  and  matrices  are  similar  to  DATA  statements  in  that  long 
amounts  of  data  can  be  handled  as  a list,  with  the  data  handling  por- 
tion of  the  program  drawing  from  that  list,  in  sequence.  Arrays  differ  in 
that  the  list  can  be  multi-dimensional 

ELIMINATING  SPACES 

One  of  the  easiest  ways  to  reduce  the  size  of  your  program  is  to 
eliminate  all  the  spaces.  Although  we  often  include  spaces  in  sample 
programs  to  provide  clarity,  you  actually  don't  need  any  spaces  in  your 
program  and  will  save  space  if  you  eliminate  them. 


AFTER  CRUNCHING: 

10  V=54296:F =54273 
20  POKEV,15:POKE54276,33 
30  POKEF,  10:POKEF,40:POKEF,70 
40  POKEV,0 


26  BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES 


USING  GOSUB  ROUTINES 

If  you  use  a particular  line  or  instruction  over  and  over,  it  might  be 
wise  to  GOSUB  to  the  line  from  several  places  in  your  program,  rather 
than  write  the  whole  line  or  instruction  every  time  you  use  it. 

USING  TAB  AND  SPC 

Instead  of  PRINTing  several  cursor  commands  to  position  a character 
on  the  screen,  it  is  often  more  economical  to  use  the  TAB  and  SPC  in- 
structions to  position  words  or  characters  on  the  screen. 


BASIC  PROGRAMMING  RULES  27 


CHAPTER 


BASIC  LANGUAGE 
VOCABULARY 

• Introduction 

• BASIC  Keywords,  Abbreviations, 
and  Function  Types 

• Description  of  BASIC  Keywords 
(Alphabetical) 

• The  COMMODORE  64  Keyboard  and 
Features 

• Screen  Editor 


29 


INTRODUCTION 


This  chapter  explains  CBM  BASIC  Language  keywords.  First  we  give 
you  an  easy  to  read  list  of  keywords,  their  abbreviations  and  what  each 
letter  looks  like  on  the  screen.  Then  we  explain  how  the  syntax  and 
operation  of  each  keyword  works  in  detail,  and  examples  are  shown  to 
give  you  an  idea  as  to  how  to  use  them  in  your  programs. 

As  a convenience,  Commodore  64  BASIC  allows  you  to  abbreviate 
most  keywords.  Abbreviations  are  entered  by  typing  enough  letters  of 
the  keyword  to  distinguish  it  from  all  other  keywords,  with  the  last  letter 
or  graphics  entered  holding  down  the  key. 

Abbreviations  do  NOT  save  any  memory  when  they're  used  in  pro- 
grams, because  all  keywords  are  reduced  to  single-character  "tokens" 
by  the  BASIC  Interpreter.  When  a program  containing  abbreviations  is 
listed,  all  keywords  appear  in  their  fully  spelled  form.  You  can  use  ab- 
breviations to  put  more  statements  onto  a program  line  even  if  they 
won't  fit  onto  the  80-character  logical  screen  line.  The  Screen  Editor 
works  on  an  80-character  line.  This  means  that  if  you  use  abbreviations 
on  any  line  that  goes  over  80  characters,  you  will  NOT  be  able  to  edit 
that  line  when  LISTed.  Instead,  what  you'll  have  to  do  is  (1)  retype  the 
entire  line  including  all  abbreviations,  or  (2)  break  the  single  line  of  code 
into  two  lines,  each  with  its  own  line  number,  etc. 

A complete  list  of  keywords,  abbreviations,  and  their  appearance  on 
the  screen  is  presented  in  Table  2-1.  They  are  followed  by  an  alpha- 
betical description  of  all  the  statements,  commands,  and  functions 
available  on  your  Commodore  64. 

This  chapter  also  explains  the  BASIC  functions  built  into  the  BASIC 
Language  Interpreter.  Built-in  functions  can  be  used  in  direct  mode 
statements  or  in  any  program,  without  having  to  define  the  function 
further.  This  is  NOT  the  case  with  user-defined  functions.  The  results  of 
built-in  BASIC  functions  can  be  used  as  immediate  output  or  they  can  be 
assigned  to  a variable  name  of  an  appropriate  type.  There  are  two 
types  of  BASIC  functions: 


1)  NUMERIC 

2)  STRING 

Arguments  of  built-in  functions  are  always  enclosed  in  parentheses 
( ).  The  parentheses  always  come  directly  after  the  function  keyword 
and  NO  SPACES  between  the  last  letter  of  the  keyword  and  the  left 
parenthesis  (. 


30  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


The  type  of  argument  needed  is  generally  decided  by  the  data  type  in 
the  result.  Functions  which  return  a string  value  as  their  result  are  iden- 
tified by  having  a dollar  sign  ($)  as  the  last  character  of  the  keyword.  In 
some  cases  string  functions  contain  one  or  more  numeric  argument. 

Numeric  functions  will  convert  between  integer  and  floating-point 
format  as  needed.  In  the  descriptions  that  follow,  the  data  type  of  the 
value  returned  is  shown  with  each  function  name.  The  types  of  argu- 
ments are  also  given  with  the  statement  format. 


Table  2-1.  COMMODORE  64  BASIC  KEYWORDS 


COMMAND 

ABBREVIATION 

SCREEN 

FUNCTION  TYPE 

A [0 

ABS 

A 

SHIFT 

B 

NUMERIC 

A 0 

AND 

A 

SHIFT 

N 

a a 

ASC 

A 

SHIFT 

S 

NUMERIC 

A D 

ATN 

A 

SHIFT 

T 

NUMERIC 

c □ 

CHR$ 

C 

SHIFT 

H 

STRING 

CL  □ 

CLOSE 

CL 

SHIFT 

O 

c □ 

CLR 

C 

SHIFT 

L 

c K 

C □ 

CMD 

C 

SHIFT 

M 

CONT 

C 

SHIFT 

O 

COS 

none 

cos 

D [♦] 

NUMERIC 

DATA 

D 

SHIFT 

A 

D B 

DEF 

D 

SHIFT 

E 

D □ 

DIM 

D 

SHIFT 

1 

BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  31 


COMMAND 

ABBREVIATION 

SCREEN 

FUNCTION  TYPE 

E 0 

END 

E 

I SHIFT 

1 N 

e a 

FN 

F □ 

F Q 

G B 

EXP 

E 

I SHIFT 

1 x 

NUMERIC 

FN 

none 

FOR 

F 

I SHIFT 

1 O 

FRE 

F 

1 SHIFT 

1 R 

NUMERIC 

GET 

G 

1 SHIFT 

1 E 

GET# 

none 

GET# 

go  a 

G □ 

IF 

GOSUB 

GO 

I SHIFT 

s 

GOTO 

G 

I SHIFT 

o 

IF 

none 

INPUT 

none 

INPUT 

' 0 

INPUT# 

1 

SHIFT 

N 

INT 

none 

INT 

LE  Q 

NUMERIC 

LEFTS 

LE 

1 SHIFT 

F 

STRING 

LEN 

none 

LEN 

L □ 

NUMERIC 

LET 

L 

SHIFT 

E 

L □ 

L □ 

LIST 

L 1 

SHIFT 

1 

LOAD 

L 1 

SHIFT 

O 

LOG 

none 

LOG 

NUMERIC 

32 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


COMMAND 


ABBREVIATION 


SCREEN 


MID$ 

M 

NEW 

NEXT 

N 

NOT 

N 

ON 

OPEN 

O 

OR 

PEEK 

P 

POKE 

P 

POS 

PRINT 

PRINT# 

P 

READ 

R 

REM 

RESTORE 

RE 

RETURN 

RE 

RIGHT$ 

R 

RND 

R 

RUN 

R 

SHIFT 


none 


SHIFT 

SHIFT 


none 


SHIFT 


none 


SHIFT 

SHIFT 


none 

? 

pm 


SHIFT 


none 


SHIFT 

SHIFT 

■ 

SHIFT 

SHIFT 

■ 

SHIFT 


FUNCTION  TYPE 


M Q 
NEW 


STRING 


E 

O 

P 

E 

O 


R 

E 


N □ 
N □ 

ON 

° n 

OR 

p B 

p □ 

POS 

? 

p □ 

r B 


NUMERIC 


NUMERIC 


S 

T 

I 

N 

U 


REM 
RE  ® 
RE  □□ 

R □ 
R 0 
R □ 


STRING 

NUMERIC 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


33 


COMMAND 

1 ABBREVIATION 

SCREEN 

FUNCTION  TYPE 

S 0 

SAVE 

s 

SHIFT 

A 

S □ 

SGN 

s 

SHIFT 

G 

NUMERIC 

S □ 

SIN 

s 

SHIFT 

1 

NUMERIC 

s n 

SPC( 

s 

SHIFT 

P 

SPECIAL 

SQR 

s 

SHIFT 

Q 

s ffl 

NUMERIC 

STATUS 

ST 

ST 

ST  □ 

NUMERIC 

STEP 

ST 

SHIFT 

E 

S D 

STOP 

s 

SHIFT 

T 

ST  B 

STR$ 

ST 

SHIFT 

R 

STRING 

s □ 

SYS 

s 

SHIFT 

Y 

T ® 

TAB( 

T | 

SHIFT 

A 

SPECIAL 

TAN 

none 

TAN 

T □ 

NUMERIC 

THEN 

T | 

SHIFT 

1 H 

TIME 

Tl 

Tl 

NUMERIC 

TIME$ 

Tl$ 

Tl$ 

STRING 

TO 

none 

TO 

u 0 

USR 

u 1 

SHIFT 

1 s 

NUMERIC 

V 0 

VAL 

v 1 

SHIFT 

1 A 

NUMERIC 

V □ 

VERIFY 

V 1 

SHIFT 

1 E 

w 0 

WAIT 

W I 

SHIFT 

A 

34 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


DESCRIPTION  OF  BASIC  KEYWORDS 


ABS 

TYPE:  Function-Numeric 
FORMAT:  ABS(<expression>) 


Action:  Returns  the  absolute  value  of  the  number,  which  is  its  value 
without  any  signs.  The  absolute  value  of  a negative  number  is  that 
number  multiplied  by  —1. 

EXAMPLES  of  ABS  Function: 

10  X = ABS  ( Y ) 

10  PRINT  ABS  ( X * J ) 

10  IF  X = ABS  (X)  THEN  PRINT  "POSITIVE" 


AND 

TYPE:  Operator 

FORMAT:  <expression>  AND  <expression> 


Action:  AND  is  used  in  Boolean  operations  to  test  bits.  It  is  also  used 
in  operations  to  check  the  truth  of  both  operands. 

In  Boolean  algebra,  the  result  of  an  AND  operation  is  1 only  if  both 
numbers  being  ANDed  are  1 . The  result  is  0 if  either  or  both  is  0 (false). 


EXAMPLES  of  1-Bit  AND  Operation: 

0 1 0 1 

AND  0 AND  0 AND  1 AND  1 

0 0 0 1 


The  Commodore  64  performs  the  AND  operation  on  numbers  in  the 
range  from  —32768  to  +32767.  Any  fractional  values  are  not  used,  and 
numbers  beyond  the  range  will  cause  an  ?ILLEGAL  QUANTITY  error 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  35 


message.  When  converted  to  binary  format,  the  range  allowed  yields  16 
bits  for  each  number.  Corresponding  bits  are  ANDed  together,  forming 
a 16-bit  result  in  the  same  range. 


EXAMPLES  of  16-Bit  AND  Operation: 


17 

AND  194 

0000000000010001 
AND  0000000011000010 

(BINARY)  0000000000000000 

(DECIMAL)  0 


32007 
AND  28761 


0111110100000111 
AND  0111000001011001 


(BINARY)  0111000000000001 
(DECIMAL)  28673 


— 241 
AND  15359 


1111111100001111 
AND  0011101111111111 

(BINARY)  0011101100001111 

(DECIMAL)  15119 


36 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


When  evaluating  a number  for  truth  or  falsehood,  the  computer  as- 
sumes the  number  is  true  as  long  as  its  value  isn't  0.  When  evaluating  a 
comparison,  it  assigns  a value  of  —1  if  the  result  is  true,  while  false  has 
a value  of  0.  In  binary  format,  —1  is  all  Ts  and  0 is  all  0's.  Therefore, 
when  ANDing  true/false  evaluations,  the  result  will  be  true  if  any  bits  in 
the  result  are  true. 

EXAMPLES  of  Using  AND  with  True/False  Evaluations: 

50  IF  X=7  AND  W=3  THEN  GOTO  10:  REM  ONLY  TRUE  IF  BOTH  X=7 
AND  W=3  ARE  TRUE 

60  IF  A AND  Q=7  THEN  GOTO  10:  REM  TRUE  IF  A IS  NON-ZERO 
AND  Q = 7 IS  TRUE 

ASC 

TYPE:  Function-Numeric 
FORMAT:  ASC  ( <string>  ) 

Action:  ASC  will  return  a number  from  0 to  255  which  corresponds  to 
the  Commodore  ASCII  value  of  the  first  character  in  the  string.  The  table 
of  Commodore  ASCII  values  is  shown  in  Appendix  C. 

EXAMPLES  OF  ASC  Function: 

10  PRINT  ASC("Z") 

20  X = ASC("ZEBRA") 

30  J = ASC(J$) 

If  there  are  no  characters  in  the  string,  an  ?ILLEGAL  QUANTITY  error 
results.  In  the  third  example  above,  if  J$="",  the  ASC  function  will  not 
work.  The  GET  and  GET#  statement  read  a CHR$(0)  as  a null  string.  To 
eliminate  this  problem,  you  should  add  a CHR$(0)  to  the  end  of  the 
string  as  shown  below. 

EXAMPLE  of  ASC  Function  Avoiding  ILLEGAL  QUANTITY  ERROR: 

30  J = ASC(J$  + CHR$(0)) 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


37 


ATN 


TYPE:  Function-Numeric 
FORMAT:  ATN  ( <number>  ) 

Action:  This  mathematical  function  returns  the  arctangent  of  the 
number.  The  result  is  the  angle  (in  radians)  whose  tangent  is  the  number 
given.  The  result  is  always  in  the  range  — 7t/2  to  +tt/2. 


EXAMPLES  of  ATN  Function: 

10  PRINT  ATN  ( 0 ) 

20  X = ATN  ( J ) * 180/7 r : REM  CONVERT  TO  DEGREES 

CHR$ 

TYPE:  Function-String 
FORMAT:  CHR$  ( <number>  ) 


Action:  This  function  converts  a Commodore  ASCII  code  to  its  char- 
acter equivalent.  See  Appendix  C for  a list  of  characters  and  their 
codes.  The  number  must  have  a value  between  0 and  255,  or  an  TIL- 
LEGAL  QUANTITY  error  message  results. 

EXAMPLES  of  CHR$  Function: 

10  PRINT  CHR$(65)  : REM  65  = UPPER  CASE  A 
20  A$  = CHR$(13)  : REM  13  = RETURN  KEY 

50  A = ASC(A$)  : A$  = CHR$(A):  REM  CONVERTS  TO  C64  ASCII 
CODE  AND  BACK 


38 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


CLOSE 


TYPE:  I/O  Statement 
FORMAT:  CLOSE  <file  number> 

Action:  This  statement  shuts  off  any  data  file  or  channel  to  a device. 
The  file  number  is  the  same  as  when  the  file  or  device  was  OPENed  (see 
OPEN  statement  and  the  section  on  INPUT/OUTPUT  programming). 

When  working  with  storage  devices  like  cassette  tape  and  disks,  the 
CLOSE  operation  stores  any  incomplete  buffers  to  the  device.  When  this 
is  not  performed,  the  file  will  be  incomplete  on  the  tape  and  unreadable 
on  the  disk.  The  CLOSE  operation  isn't  as  necessary  with  other  devices, 
but  it  does  free  up  memory  for  other  files.  See  your  external  device 
manual  for  more  details. 

EXAMPLES  of  CLOSE  Statement: 

10  CLOSE  1 
20  CLOSE  X 

30  CLOSE  9 * ( 1 + J ) 

CLR 

TYPE:  Statement 
FORMAT:  CLR 

Action:  This  statement  makes  available  RAM  memory  that  had  been 
used  but  is  no  longer  needed.  Any  BASIC  program  in  memory  is  un- 
touched, but  all  variables,  arrays,  GOSUB  addresses,  FOR.  . . NEXT 
loops,  user-defined  functions,  and  files  are  erased  from  memory,  and 
their  space  is  made  available  to  new  variables,  etc. 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  39 


In  the  case  of  files  to  the  disk  and  cassette  tape,  they  are  not  properly 
CLOSEd  by  the  CLR  statement.  The  information  about  the  files  is  lost  to 
the  computer,  including  any  incomplete  buffers.  The  disk  drive  will  still 
think  the  file  is  OPEN.  See  the  CLOSE  statement  for  more  information  on 
this. 

EXAMPLE  of  CLR  Statement: 


10  X=25 
20  CLR 
30  PRINT  X 

RUN 

0 

READY 


CMD 


TYPE:  I/O  Statement 

FORMAT:  CMD  <file  number>  [ , string  ] 


Action: This  statement  switches  the  primary  output  device  from  the  TV 
screen  to  the  file  specified.  This  file  could  be  on  disk,  tape,  printer,  or  an 
devce  like  the  modem.  The  file  number  must  be  specified  in  a prior 
OPEN  statement.  The  string,  when  specified,  is  sent  to  the  file.  This  is 
handy  for  titling  printouts,  etc. 

When  this  command  is  in  effect,  any  PRINT  statements  and  LIST  com- 
mands will  not  display  on  the  screen,  but  will  send  the  text  in  the  same 
format  to  the  file. 

To  re-direct  the  output  back  to  the  screen,  the  PRINT#  command 
should  send  a blank  line  to  the  CMD  device  before  CLOSEing,  so  it  will 
stop  expecting  data  (called  "un-listening"  the  device). 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


Any  system  error  (like  ?SYNTAX  ERROR)  will  cause  output  to  return  to 
the  screen.  Devices  aren't  un-listened  by  this,  so  you  should  send  a 
blank  line  after  an  error  condition.  (See  your  printer  or  disk  manual  for 
more  details.) 

EXAMPLES  of  CMD  Statement: 

OPEN  4,  4:  CMD  4,  "TITLE"  : LIST:  REM  LISTS  PROGRAM  ON  PRINTER 
PRINT#  4:  CLOSE  4:  REM  UN-LISTENS  AND  CLOSES  PRINTER 

10  OPEN  1,  1,  1,  "TEST":  REM  CREATE  SEQ  FILE 
20  CMD  1:  REM  OUTPUT  TO  TAPE  FILE,  NOT  SCREEN 
30  FOR  L = 1 TO  100 

40  PRINT  L:  REM  PUTS  NUMBER  IN  TAPE  BUFFER 
50  NEXT 

60  PRINT#  1:  REM  UNLISTEN 

70  CLOSE  1:  REM  WRITE  UNFINISHED  BUFFER,  PROPERLY  FINISH 

CONT 


TYPE:  Command 
FORMAT:  CONT 


Action: This  command  re-starts  the  execution  of  a program  which  was 
halted  by  a STOP  or  END  statement  or  the  key  being 

pressed.  The  program  will  re-start  at  the  exact  place  from  which  it  left 
off. 

While  the  program  is  stopped,  the  user  can  inspect  or  change  any 
variables  or  look  at  the  program.  When  de-bugging  or  examining  a 
program,  STOP  statements  can  be  placed  at  strategic  locations  to  allow 
examination  of  variables  and  to  check  the  flow  of  the  program. 

The  error  message  CAN'T  CONTINUE  will  result  from  editing  the 
program  (even  just  hitting  with  the  cursor  on  an  unchanged 

line),  or  if  the  program  halted  due  to  an  error,  or  if  you  caused  an  error 
before  typing  CONT  to  re-start  the  program. 

EXAMPLE  of  CONT  Command: 


10  PI  =0:C  ==  1 
20  PI  = PI+4/C— 4/(C+2) 
30  PRINT  PI 
40  C=C+4:GOTO  20 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


41 


This  program  calculates  the  value  of  PI.  RUN  this  program,  and  after 
a short  while  hit  the  key.  You  will  see  the  display: 


BREAK  IN  20 


NOTE:  Might  be  different  number. 


Type  the  command  PRINT  C to  see  how  far  the  Commodore  64  has 
gotten.  Then  use  CONT  to  resume  from  where  the  Commodore  64  left 
off. 


COS 


TYPE:  Function 

FORMAT:  COS  ( <number>  ) 

Action:  This  mathematical  function  calculates  the  cosine  of  the 
number,  where  the  number  is  an  angle  in  radians. 

EXAMPLES  of  COS  Function: 

10  PRINT  COS  ( 0 ) 

20  X = COS  ( Y * 7T  / 180  ) : REM  CONVERT  DEGREES  TO  RADIANS 

DATA 

TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  DATA  Clist  of  constants> 

Action:  DATA  statements  store  information  within  a program.  The 
program  uses  the  information  by  means  of  the  READ  statement,  which 
pulls  successive  constants  from  the  DATA  statements. 

The  DATA  statements  don't  have  to  be  executed  by  the  program,  they 
only  have  to  be  present.  Therefore,  they  are  usually  placed  at  the  end  of 
the  program. 

All  data  statements  in  a program  are  treated  as  a continuous  list. 
Data  is  READ  from  left  to  right,  from  the  lowest  numbered  line  to  the 
highest.  If  the  READ  statement  encounters  data  that  doesn't  fit  the  type 
requested  (if  it  needs  a number  and  finds  a string)  an  error  message 
occurs. 


42 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


Any  characters  can  be  included  as  data,  but  if  certain  ones  are  used 
the  data  item  must  be  enclosed  by  quote  marks  ("  ").  These  include 
punctuation  like  comma  (,),  colon  (:),  blank  spaces,  and  shifted  letters, 
graphics,  and  cursor  control  characters. 

EXAMPLES  of  DATA  Statement: 

10  DATA  1,  10,  5,  8 

20  DATA  JOHN,  PAUL,  GEORGE,  RINGO 

30  DATA  "DEAR  MARY,  HOW  ARE  YOU,  LOVE,  BILL" 

40  DATA  -1.7E-9,  3.33 

DEF  FN 

TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  DEF  FN  <name>  ( <variable>  ) = <expres- 
sion> 

This  sets  up  a user-defined  function  that  can  be  used  later  in 
the  program.  The  function  can  consist  of  any  mathematical  formula. 
Usec-defined  functions  save  space  in  programs  where  a long  formula  is 
used  in  several  places.  The  formula  need  only  be  specified  once,  in  the 
definition  statement,  and  then  it  is  abbreviated  as  a function  name.  It 
must  be  executed  once,  but  any  subsequent  executions  are  ignored. 

The  function  name  is  the  letters  FN  followed  by  any  variable  name. 
This  can  be  1 or  2 characters,  the  first  being  a letter  and  the  second  a 
letter  or  digit. 

EXAMPLES  of  DEF  FN  Statement: 

10  DEF  FN  A (X)  = X + 7 
20  DEF  FN  AA  (X)  = Y * Z 
30  DEF  FNA9  (Q)  = INT(  RND(  1)*  Q + 1) 

The  function  is  called  later  in  the  program  by  using  the  function  name 
with  a variable  in  parentheses.  This  function  name  is  used  like  any  other 
variable,  and  its  value  is  automatically  calculated. 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


43 


EXAMPLES  of  FN  Use: 


40  PRINT  FN  A (9) 

50  R = FNAA  (9) 

60  G = G + FN  A9  (10) 


In  line  50  above,  the  number  9 inside  the  parentheses  does  not  affect 
the  outcome  of  the  function,  because  the  function  definition  in  line  20 
doesn't  use  the  variable  in  the  parentheses.  The  result  is  Y times  Z, 
regardless  of  the  value  of  X.  In  the  other  two  functions,  the  value  in 
parentheses  does  affect  the  result. 


DIM 


TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  DIM  <variable>  ( <subscripts>  ) [ , 
<variable>  ( <subscripts>  ) . . . ] 


Action:  This  statement  defines  an  array  or  matrix  of  variables.  This 
allows  you  to  use  the  variable  name  with  a subscript.  The  subscript 
points  to  the  element  being  used.  The  lowest  element  number  in  an 
array  is  zero,  and  the  highest  is  the  number  given  in  the  DIM  statement, 
which  has  a maximum  of  32767. 

The  DIM  statement  must  be  executed  once  and  only  once  for  each 
array.  A REDIM'D  ARRAY  error  occurs  if  this  line  is  re-executed.  There- 
fore, most  programs  perform  all  DIM  operations  at  the  very  beginning. 

There  may  be  any  number  of  dimensions  and  255  subscripts  in  an 
array,  limited  only  by  the  amount  of  RAM  memory  which  is  available  to 
hold  the  variables.  The  array  may  be  made  up  of  normal  numeric  vari- 
ables, as  shown  above,  or  of  strings  or  integer  numbers.  If  the  variables 
are  other  than  normal  numeric,  use  the  $ or  % signs  after  the  variable 
name  to  indicate  string  or  integer  variables. 


44 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


If  an  array  referenced  in  a program  was  never  DIMensioned,  it  is 
automatically  dimensioned  to  11  elements  in  each  dimension  used  in  the 
first  reference. 

EXAMPLES  of  DIM  Statement: 

10  DIM  A ( 100  ) 

20  DIM  Z ( 5,  7),  Y ( 3,  4,  5) 

30  DIM  Y7%  ( Q ) 

40  DIM  PH$  (1000) 

50  F (4)  =9:  REM  AUTOMATICALLY  PERFORMS  DIM  F (10) 

EXAMPLE  of  FOOTBALL  SCORE-KEEPING  Using  DIM: 

10  DIM  S(l,5),  T$(l) 

20  INPUT  "TEAM  NAMES";  T$(0),  T$(l) 

30  FOR  Q=1  TO  5:  FOR  T=0  TO  1 
40  PRINT  T$(T),  "SCORE  IN  QUARTER"  Q 
50  INPUT  S(T,Q):  S(T,0)=  S(T,0)+  S(T,Q) 

60  NEXT  T,Q 

70  PRINT  CHR$(147)  "SCOREBOARD" 

80  PRINT  "QUARTER" 

90  FOR  Q=1  TO  5 
100  PRINT  TAB(  Q*2  +9)  Q; 

110  NEXT:  PRINT  TAB(15)  "TOTAL" 

120  FOR  T=0  TO  1:  PRINT  T$(T); 

130  FOR  Q=1  TO  5 

140  PRINT  TAB(Q*2  +9)  S(T,Q); 

150  NEXT:  PRINT  TAB(15)  S(T,0) 

160  NEXT 

CALCULATING  MEMORY  USED  BY  DIM: 

5 bytes  for  the  array  name 
2 bytes  for  each  dimension 

2 bytes/element  for  integer  variables 

5 bytes/element  for  normal  numeric  variables 

3 bytes/element  for  string  variables 

1 byte  for  each  character  in  each  string  element 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  45 


END 


TYPE:  Statement 
FORMAT:  END 


Action:  This  finishes  a program's  execution  and  displays  the  READY 
message,  returning  control  to  the  person  operating  the  computer.  There 
may  be  any  number  of  END  statements  within  a program.  While  it  is  not 
necessary  to  include  any  END  statements  at  all,  it  is  recommended  that 
a program  does  conclude  with  one,  rather  than  just  running  out  of  lines. 

The  END  statement  is  similar  to  the  STOP  statement.  The  only  differ- 
ence is  that  STOP  causes  the  computer  to  display  the  message  BREAK 
IN  LINE  XX  and  END  just  displays  READY.  Both  statements  allow  the 
computer  to  resume  execution  by  typing  the  CONT  command. 

EXAMPLES  of  END  Statement: 

10  PRINT  "DO  YOU  REALLY  WANT  TO  RUN  THIS  PROGRAM" 

20  INPUT  A$ 

30  IF  A$  = "NO"  THEN  END 
40  REM  REST  OF  PROGRAM  . . . 

999  END 

EXP 

TYPE:  Function-Numeric 
FORMAT:  EXP  ( <number>  ) 

Action:  This  mathematical  function  calculates  the  constant  e 
(2.71828183)  raised  to  the  power  of  the  number  given.  A value  greater 
than  88.0296919  causes  an  ?OVERFLOW  error  to  occur. 

EXAMPLES  of  EXP  Function: 

10  PRINT  EXP  (1) 

20  X = Y * EXP  (Z  * Q) 


46  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


FN 


TYPE:  Function-Numeric 

FORMAT:  FN  <name>  ( <number>  ) 

Action:  This  function  references  the  previously  DEFined  formula  spec- 
ified by  name.  The  number  is  substituted  into  its  place  (if  any)  and  the 
formula  is  calculated.  The  result  will  be  a numeric  value. 

This  function  can  be  used  in  direct  mode,  as  long  as  the  statement 
DEFining  it  has  been  executed. 

If  an  FN  is  executed  before  the  DEF  statement  which  defines  it,  an 
UNDEF'D  FUNCTION  error  occurs. 

EXAMPLES  of  FN  (User-Defined)  Function: 

PRINT  FN  A ( Q ) 

1100  J = FN  J (7)  + FN  J (9) 

9990  IF  FN  B 7 (l  + l)=  6 THEN  END 

FOR  . . . TO  . . . [STEP  . . . ] 

TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  FOR  <variable>  = <start>  TO  <limit>  [ STEP 
<increment>  ] 

Action:  This  is  a special  BASIC  statement  that  lets  you  easily  use  a 
variable  as  a counter.  You  must  specify  certain  parameters:  the 
floating-point  variable  name,  its  starting  value,  the  limit  of  the  count, 
and  how  much  to  add  during  each  cycle. 

Here  is  a simple  BASIC  program  that  counts  from  1 to  10,  PRINTing 
each  number  and  ENDing  when  complete,  and  using  no  FOR  state- 
ments: 

100  L = 1 

110  PRINT  L 

120  L = L + 1 

130  IF  L <=  10  THEN  110 

140  END 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  47 


Using  the  FOR  statement,  here  is  the  same  program: 


100  FOR  L = 1 TO  10 
110  PRINT  L 
120  NEXT  L 
130  END 

As  you  can  see,  the  program  is  shorter  and  easier  to  understand  using 
the  FOR  statement. 

When  the  FOR  statement  is  executed,  several  operations  take  place. 
The  <start>  value  is  placed  in  the  <variable>  being  used  in  the 
counter.  In  the  example  above,  a 1 is  placed  in  L. 

When  the  NEXT  statement  is  reached,  the  <increment>  value  is 
added  to  the  <variable>.  If  a STEP  was  not  included,  the  <increment> 
is  set  to  +1.  The  first  time  the  program  above  hits  line  120,  1 is  added 
to  L,  so  the  new  value  of  L is  2. 

Now  the  value  in  the  <variable>  is  compared  to  the  <limit>.  If  the 
<limit>  has  not  been  reached  yet,  the  program  GOes  TO  the  line  after 
the  original  FOR  statement.  In  this  case,  the  value  of  2 in  L is  less  than 
the  limit  of  10,  so  it  GOes  TO  line  110. 

Eventually,  the  value  of  <limit>  is  exceeded  by  the  <variable>.  At 
that  time,  the  loop  is  concluded  and  the  program  continues  with  the  line 
following  the  NEXT  statement.  In  our  example,  the  value  of  L reaches 

11,  which  exceeds  the  limit  of  10,  and  the  program  goes  on  with  line 
I oU. 

When  the  value  of  <increment>  is  positive,  the  <variable>  must 

exceed  the  <limit>,  and  when  it  is  negative  it  must  become  less  than 
the  <limit>. 


NOTE:  A loop  always  executes  at  least  once. 


EXAMPLES  of  FOR.  . .TO.  . .STEP.  . .Statement: 

100  FOR  L = 100  TO  0 STEP  -1 
100  FOR  L = PI  TO  6*7 t STEP  .01 
100  FOR  AA  = 3 TO  3 


48 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


FRE 


TYPE:  Function 

FORMAT:  FRE  ( <variable>  ) 

Action:  This  function  tells  you  how  much  RAM  is  available  for  your 
program  and  its  variables.  If  a program  tries  to  use  more  space  than  is 
available,  the  OUT  OF  MEMORY  error  results. 

The  number  in  parentheses  can  have  any  value,  and  it  is  not  used  in 
the  calculation. 


NOTE:  If  the  result  of  FRE  is  negative,  add  65536  to  the  FRE  number  to  get  the 
number  of  bytes  available  in  memory. 


EXAMPLES  of  FRE  Function: 

PRINT  FRE  ( 0 ) 

10  X = ( FRE  ( K ) - 1000  ) / 7 

950  IF  FRE  ( 0 )<  100  THEN  PRINT  "NOT  ENOUGH  ROOM" 

NOTE:  The  following  always  tells  you  the  current  available  RAM: 

PRINT  FRE(0)  - (FRE(0)  < 0)*  65536 


GET 


TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  GET  <variable  list> 

Action:  This  statement  reads  each  key  typed  by  the  user.  As  the  user 
is  typing,  the  characters  are  stored  in  the  Commodore  64's  keyboard 
buffer.  Up  to  10  characters  are  stored  here,  and  any  keys  struck  after 
the  10th  are  lost.  Reading  one  of  the  characters  with  the  GET  statement 
makes  room  for  another  character. 

If  the  GET  statement  specifies  numeric  data,  and  the  user  types  a key 
other  than  a number,  the  message  7SYNTAX  ERROR  appears.  To  be 
safe,  read  the  keys  as  strings  and  convert  them  to  numbers  later. 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


49 


The  GET  statement  can  be  used  to  avoid  some  of  the  limitations  of  the 
INPUT  statement.  For  more  on  this,  see  the  section  on  Using  the  GET 
Statement  in  the  Programming  Techniques  section. 


EXAMPLES  of  GET  Statement: 

10  GET  A$:  IF  A$  = ""  THEN  10:  REM  LOOPS  IN  10  UNTIL  ANY  KEY 
HIT 

20  GET  A$,  B$,  C$,  D$,  E$:  REM  READS  5 KEYS 
30  GET  A,  A$ 


GET# 


TYPE:  I/O  Statement 

FORMAT:  GET#  <file  nomber>,  <variable  list> 


Action:  This  statement  reads  characters  one-at-a-time  from  the  device 
or  file  specified.  It  works  the  same  as  the  GET  statement,  except  that  the 
data  comes  from  a different  place  than  the  keyboard.  If  no  character  is 
received,  the  variable  is  set  to  an  empty  string  (equal  to  "")  or  to  0 for 
numeric  variables.  Characters  used  to  separate  data  in  flies,  like  the 
comma  (,)  or  key  code  (ASC  code  of  13),  are  received  like 

any  other  character. 

When  used  with  device  #3  (TV  screen),  this  statement  will  read  char- 
acters one  by  one  from  the  screen.  Each  use  of  GET#  moves  the  cursor  1 
position  to  the  right.  The  character  at  the  end  of  the  logical  line  is 
changed  to  a CHR$  (13),  the  key  code. 


EXAMPLES  of  GET#  Statement: 
5 GET#  1,  A$ 

10  OPEN  1,  3:  GET#  1,  Z7$ 
20  GET#  1,  A,  B,  C$,  D$ 


50  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


GOSUB 


TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  GOSUB  <line  number> 


Action:  This  is  a specialized  form  of  the  GOTO  statement,  with  one 
important  difference:  GOSUB  remembers  where  it  came  from.  When  the 
RETURN  statement  (different  from  the  key  on  the  keyboard) 

is  reached  in  the  program,  the  program  jumps  back  to  the  statement 
immediately  following  the  original  GOSUB  statement. 

The  major  use  of  a subroutine  (GOSUB  really  means  GO  to  a SUB- 
routine)  is  when  a small  section  of  program  is  used  by  different  sections 
of  the  program.  By  using  subroutines  rather  than  repeating  the  same 
lines  over  and  over  at  different  places  in  the  program,  you  can  save  lots 
of  program  space.  In  this  way,  GOSUB  is  similar  to  DEF  FN.  DEF  FN  lets 
you  save  space  when  using  a formula,  while  GOSUB  saves  space  when 
using  a several-line  routine.  Here  is  an  inefficient  program  that  doesn't 
use  GOSUB: 


100  PRINT  "THIS  PROGRAM  PRINTS" 
110  FOR  L = 1 TO  500  : NEXT 
120  PRINT  "SLOWLY  ON  THE  SCREEN" 
130  FOR  L = 1 TO  500  : NEXT 
140  PRINT  "USING  A SIMPLE  LOOP" 
150  FOR  L = 1 TO  500  : NEXT 
160  PRINT  "AS  A TIME  DELAY." 

170  FOR  L = 1 TO  500  : NEXT 


Here  is  the  same  program  using  GOSUB: 

100  PRINT  "THIS  PROGRAM  PRINTS" 
110  GOSUB  200 

120  PRINT  "SLOWLY  ON  THE  SCREEN" 
130  GOSUB  200 

140  PRINT  "USING  A SIMPLE  LOOP" 

150  GOSUB  200 

160  PRINT  "AS  A TIME  DELAY" 

170  GOSUB  200 
180  END 

200  FOR  L = 1 TO  500  : NEXT 
210  RETURN 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  51 


Each  time  the  program  executes  a GOSUB,  the  line  number  and  posi- 
tion in  the  program  line  are  saved  in  a special  area  called  the  "stack," 
which  takes  up  256  bytes  of  your  memory.  This  limits  the  amount  of  data 
that  can  be  stored  in  the  stack.  Therefore,  the  number  of  subroutine 
return  addresses  that  can  be  stored  is  limited,  and  care  should  be  taken 
to  make  sure  every  GOSUB  hits  the  corresponding  RETURN,  or  else  youll 
run  out  of  memory  even  though  you  have  plenty  of  bytes  free. 


GOTO 


TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  GOTO  <line  number> 

or  GO  TO  <line  number> 


Action:  This  statement  allows  the  BASIC  program  to  execute  lines  out 
of  numerical  order.  The  word  GOTO  followed  by  a number  will  make 
the  program  jump  to  the  line  with  that  number.  GOTO  NOT  followed  by 
a number  equals  GOTO  0.  It  must  have  the  line  number  after  the  word 


GOTO. 

It  is  possible  to  create  loops 
simplest  example  of  this  is  a line 
These  loops  can  be  stopped 
board. 


with  GOTO  that  will  never  end.  The 
that  GOes  TO  itself,  like  10  GOTO  10. 


using  the 


RUN/STOP 


key  on  the  key- 


EXAMPLES  of  GOTO  Statement: 

GOTO  100 
10  GO  TO  50 
20  GOTO  999 


IF  . . . THEN  . . . 

TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  IF  <expression>  THEN  <line  number> 

IF  <expression>  GOTO  <line  number> 

IF  <expre$sion>  THEN  <statements> 

Action:  This  is  the  statement  that  gives  BASIC  most  of  its  "intelli- 
gence," the  ability  to  evaluate  conditions  and  take  different  actions  de- 
pending on  the  outcome. 


52  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


The  word  IF  is  followed  by  an  expression,  which  can  include  varia- 
bles, strings,  numbers,  comparisons,  and  logical  operators.  The  word 
THEN  appears  on  the  some  line  and  is  followed  by  either  a line  number 
or  one  or  more  BASIC  statements.  When  the  expression  is  false,  every- 
thing after  the  word  THEN  on  that  line  is  ignored,  and  execution  con- 
tinues with  the  next  line  number  in  the  program.  A true  result  makes  the 
program  either  branch  to  the  line  number  after  the  word  THEN  or  exe- 
cute whatever  other  BASIC  statements  are  found  on  that  line. 


EXAMPLE  of  IF.  . .GOTO.  . .Statement: 

100  INPUT  "TYPE  A NUMBER";  N 

110  IF  N <=  0 GOTO  200 

120  PRINT  "SQUARE  ROOT="  SQR(N) 

130  GOTO  100 

200  PRINT  "NUMBER  MUST  BE  >0" 

210  GOTO  100 

This  program  prints  out  the  square  root  of  any  positive  number.  The  IF 
statement  here  is  used  to  validate  the  result  of  the  INPUT.  When  the 
result  of  N <=  0 is  true,  the  program  skips  to  line  200,  and  when  the 
result  is  false  the  next  line  to  be  executed  is  120.  Note  that  THEN  GOTO 
is  not  needed  with  IF.  . .THEN,  as  in  line  110  where  GOTO  200  actually 
means  THEN  GOTO  200. 


EXAMPLE  OF  IF.  . . THEN.  . . Statement: 

100  FOR  L = 1 TO  100 

110  IF  RND(l)  < .5  THEN  X = X+  1 : GOTO  130 
120  Y = Y+  1 
130  NEXT  L 

140  PRINT  "HEADS=  " X 
150  PRINT  "TAILS  = " Y 


The  IF  in  line  1 10  tests  a random  number  to  see  if  it  is  less  than  .5. 
When  the  result  is  true,  the  whole  series  of  statements  following  the 
word  THEN  are  executed:  first  X is  incremented  by  1,  then  the  program 
skips  to  line  130.  When  the  result  is  false,  the  program  drops  to  the  next 
statement,  line  120. 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  53 


INPUT 


TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  INPUT  [ "<prompt>"  ; ] <variabie  list> 


Action:  This  is  a statement  that  lets  the  person  RUNning  the  program 
"feed"  information  into  the  computer.  When  executed,  this  statement 
PRINTs  a question  mark  (?)  on  the  screen,  and  positions  the  cursor  1 
space  to  the  right  of  the  question  mark.  Now  the  computer  waits,  cursor 
blinking,  for  the  operator  to  type  in  the  answer  and  press  the 
key. 

The  word  INPUT  may  be  followed  by  any  text  contained  in  quote 
marks  ( " " ).  This  text  is  PRINTed  on  the  screen,  followed  by  the  ques- 
tion mark. 

After  the  text  comes  a semicolon  (;)  and  the  name  of  one  or  more 
variables  separated  by  commas.  This  variable  is  where  the  computer 
stores  the  information  that  the  operator  types.  The  variable  can  be  any 
legal  variable  name,  and  you  can  have  several  different  variable 
names,  each  for  a different  input. 


EXAMPLES  of  INPUT  Statement: 


100  INPUT  A 

110  INPUT  B,  C,  D 

120  INPUT  "PROMPT";  E 


When  this  program  RUNs,the  question  mark  appears  to  prompt  the 
operator  that  the  Commodore  64  is  expecting  an  input  for  line  100.  Any 
number  typed  in  goes  into  A,  for  later  use  in  the  program.  If  the  answer 
typed  was  not  a number,  the  ?REDO  FROM  START  message  appears, 
which  means  that  a string  was  received  when  a number  was  expected. 
If  the  operator  just  hits  without  typing  anything,  the  vari- 

able's value  doesn't  change. 

Now  the  next  question  mark,  for  line  110,  appears.  If  we  type  only 
one  number  and  hit  , the  Commodore  64  will  now  display  2 

question  marks  (??),  which  means  that  more  input  is  required.  You  can 


54  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


just  type  as  many  inputs  as  you  need  separated  by  commas,  which 
prevents  the  double  question  mark  from  appearing.  If  you  type  more 
data  than  the  INPUT  statement  requested,  the  ?EXTRA  IGNORED  mes- 
sage appears,  which  means  that  the  extra  items  you  typed  were  not  put 
into  any  variables. 

Line  120  displays  the  word  PROMPT  before  the  question  mark  ap- 
pears. The  semicolon  is  required  between  the  prompt  and  any  list  of 
variables. 

The  INPUT  statement  can  never  be  used  outside  a program.  The 
Commodore  64  needs  space  for  a buffer  for  the  INPUT  variables,  the 
same  space  that  is  used  for  commands. 


INPUT# 

TYPE:  I/O  Statement 

FORMAT:  INPUT#  <file  nomber>  , <variable  list> 

Action:  This  is  usually  the  fastest  and  easiest  way  to  retrieve  data 
stored  in  a file  on  disk  or  tape.  The  data  is  in  the  form  of  whole  vari- 
ables of  up  to  80  characters  in  length,  as  opposed  to  the  one-at-a-time 
method  of  GET#.  First,  the  file  must  have  been  OPENed,  then  INPUT# 
can  fill  the  variables. 

The  INPUT#  command  assumes  a variable  is  finished  when  it  reads  a 
RETURN  code  (CHR$  (13)),  a comma  (,),  semicolon  (;),  or  colon  (:). 
Quote  marks  can  be  used  to  enclose  these  characters  when  writing  if 
they  are  needed  (see  PRINT#  statement). 

If  the  variable  type  used  is  numeric,  and  non-numeric  characters  are 
received,  a BAD  DATA  error  results.  INPUT#  can  read  strings  up  to  80 
characters  long,  beyond  which  a STRING  TOO  LONG  error  results. 

When  used  with  device  #3  (the  screen),  this  statement  will  read  an 
entire  logical  line  and  move  the  cursor  down  to  the  next  line. 

EXAMPLES  of  INPUT#  Statement: 

10  INPUT#  1,  A 
20  INPUT#  2,  A$,  B$ 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  55 


INT 


TYPE:  Integer  Function 
FORMAT:  INT  (<numeric>) 

Returns  the  integer  value  of  the  expression.  If  the  expression 
is  positive,  the  fractional  part  is  left  off.  If  the  expression  is  negative, 
any  fraction  causes  the  next  lower  integer  to  be  returned. 

EXAMPLES  of  INT  Function: 

120  PRINT  INT(99.4343),  INT(- 12.34) 

99  -13 

LEFT$ 

TYPE:  String  Function 

FORMAT:  LEFT$  (<string>,  <integer>) 

Action:  Returns  a string  comprised  of  the  leftmost  <integer>  char- 
acters of  the  <string>.  The  integer  argument  value  must  be  in  the 
range  0 to  255.  If  the  integer  is  greater  than  the  length  of  the  string,  the 
entire  string  will  be  returned.  If  an  <integer>  value  of  zero  is  used, 
then  a null  string  (of  zero  length)  is  returned. 

EXAMPLES  of  LEFT$  Function: 

10  A$  = "COMMODORE  COMPUTERS" 

20  B$  = LEFT$(A$,9):  PRINT  B$ 

RUN 

COMMODORE 


56 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


LEN 


TYPE:  Integer  Function 
Format:  LEN  (<$tring>) 

Action:  Returns  the  number  of  characters  in  the  string  expression. 
Non-printed  characters  and  blanks  are  counted. 

EXAMPLE  of  LEN  Function: 

CC$  = "COMMODORE  COMPUTER":  PRINT  LEN(CC$) 

18 


LET 

TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  [LET]  <variable>  = <expression> 


Action:  The  LET  statement  can  be  used  to  assign  a value  to  a vari- 
able. But  the  word  LET  is  optional  and  therefore  most  advanced  pro- 
grammers leave  LET  out  because  it's  always  understood  and  wastes  val- 
uable memory.  The  equal  sign  ( = ) alone  is  sufficient  when  assigning  the 
value  of  an  expression  to  a variable  name. 


EXAMPLES  of  LET  Statement: 


10  LET  D=  12 
20  LET  E$  = "ABC" 
30  F$  = "WORDS" 
40  SUM$  = E$  + F$ 


(This  is  the  same  as  D = 12) 


(SUM$  would  equal  ABCWORDS) 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


57 


LIST 


TYPE:  Command 

FORMAT:  LIST  [[<first-line>]-[<last-line>]] 


Action:  The  LIST  command  allows  you  to  look  at  lines  of  the  BASIC 
program  currently  in  the  memory  of  your  Commodore  64.  This  lets  you 
use  your  computer's  powerful  screen  editoi  to  edit  programs  which 
you've  USTed  both  quickly  and  easily. 

The  LIST  system  command  displays  all  or  part  of  the  program  that  is 
currently  in  memory  on  the  default  output  device.  The  LIST  will  normally 
be  directed  to  the  screen  and  the  CMD  statement  can  be  used  to  switch 
output  to  an  external  device  such  as  a printer  or  a disk.  The  LIST  com- 
mand can  appear  in  a program,  but  BASIC  always  returns  to  the  system 
READY  message  after  a LIST  is  executed. 

When  you  bring  the  program  LIST  onto  the  screen,  the  "scrolling"  of 
the  display  from  the  bottom  of  the  screen  to  the  top  can  be  slowed  by 
holding  down  the  ConTRoL  key.  LIST  is  aborted  by  typing 

the  key. 

If  no  line-numbers  are  given  the  entire  program  is  listed.  If  only  the 
first-line  number  is  specified,  and  followed  by  a hyphen  (-),  that  line  and 
all  higher-numbered  lines  are  listed.  If  only  the  last  line-number  is  spec- 
ified, and  it  is  preceded  by  a hyphen,  then  all  lines  from  the  beginning 
of  the  program  through  that  line  are  listed.  If  both  numbers  are  spec- 
ified, the  entire  range,  including  the  line-numbers  LISTed,  is  displayed. 


EXAMPLES  of  LIST  Command: 

LIST  (Lists  the  program  currently  in  memory.) 

LIST  500  (Lists  line  500  only.) 

LIST  150-  (Lists  all  lines  from  150  to  the  end.) 

LIST  -1000  (Lists  all  lines  from  the  lowest  through  1000.) 

LIST  150-1000  (Lists  lines  150  through  1000,  inclusive.) 

10  PRINT  "THIS  IS  LINE  10" 

20  LIST  (LIST  used  in  Program  Mode) 

30  PRINT  "THIS  IS  LINE  30" 


58 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


LOAD 


TYPE:  Command 

FORMAT:  LOAD  ["<file-name>"]  [,<device>] 
[,<address>] 


Action:  The  LOAD  statement  reads  the  contents  of  a program  file  from 
tape  or  disk  into  memory.  That  way  you  can  use  the  information  LOADed 
or  change  the  information  in  some  way.  The  device  number  is  optional, 
but  when  it  is  left  out  the  computer  will  automatically  default  to  1,  the 
cassette  unit.  The  disk  unit  is  normally  device  number  8.  The  LOAD 
closes  all  open  files  and,  if  it  is  used  in  direct  mode,  it  performs  a CLR 
(clear)  before  reading  the  program.  If  LOAD  is  executed  from  within  a 
program,  the  program  is  RUN.  This  means  that  you  can  use  LOAD  to 
"chain"  several  programs  together.  None  of  the  variables  are  cleared 
during  a chain  operation. 

If  you  are  using  file-name  pattern  matching,  the  first  file  which 
matches  the  pattern  is  loaded.  The  asterisk  in  quotes  by  itself  ("*") 
causes  the  first  file-name  in  the  disk  directory  to  be  loaded,  if  the  file- 
name used  does  not  exist  or  if  it  is  not  a program  file,  the  BASIC  error 
message  ?FILE  NOT  FOUND  occurs. 

When  LOADing  programs  from  tape,  the  <file-name>  can  be  left 
out,  and  the  next  program  file  on  the  tape  will  be  read.  The  Commodore 
64  will  blank  the  screen  to  the  border  color  after  the  PLAY  key  is 
pressed.  When  the  program  is  found,  the  screen  clears  to  the  back- 
ground color  and  the  "FOUND"  message  is  displayed.  When  the  B 
key,  key,  Q key,  or  ‘s  pressed,  the  file  will 

be  loaded.  Programs  will  LOAD  starting  at  memory  location  2048  unless 
a secondary  <address>  of  1 is  used.  If  you  use  the  secondary  address 
of  1 this  will  cause  the  program  to  LOAD  to  the  memory  location  from 
which  it  was  saved. 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  59 


EXAMPLES  of  LOAD  Command: 


LOAD 


(Reads  the  next  program  on  tape) 


LOAD  A$ 


(Uses  the  name  in  A$  to  search) 


LOAD  "*",8 


(LOADs  first  program  from  disk) 


LOAD  ""JJ 


(Looks  for  the  first  program  on 
tape,  and  LOADs  it  into  the  same 
part  of  memory  that  it  came 
from) 


LOAD  "STAR  TREK"  (LOAD  a file  from  tape) 

PRESS  PLAY  ON  TAPE 

FOUND  STAR  TREK 

LOADING 

READY. 


LOAD  "FUN", 8 (LOAD  a file  from  disk) 

SEARCHING  FOR  FUN 

LOADING 

READY. 


LOAD  "GAME  ONE", 8,1 
SEARCHING  FOR  GAME  ONE 
LOADING 
READY. 


(LOAD  a file  to  the  specific 
memory  location  from  which  the 
program  was  saved  on  the  disk) 


60 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


LOG 


TYPE:  Floating-Point  Function 
FORMAT:  LOG  (<numeric>) 

Action:  Returns  the  natural  logarithm  (log  to  the  base  of  e)  of  the 
argument.  If  the  value  of  the  argument  is  zero  or  negative  the  BASIC 
error  message  ?ILLEGAL  QUANTITY  will  occur. 

EXAMPLES  of  LOG  Function: 

25  PRINT  LOG(45/7) 

1.86075234 

10  NUM  = LOG(ARG)  / LOG(IO)  (Calculates  the  LOG  of  ARG  to  the 

base  10) 


MID$ 

TYPE:  String  Function 

FORMAT:  MID$  (<string>,  <numeric-l>  [,<numeric- 

2>]) 

Action:  The  MID$  function  returns  a sub-string  which  is  taken  from 
within  a larger  <string>  argument.  The  starting  position  of  the  sub- 
string is  defined  by  the  <numeric-l>  argument  and  the  length  of  the 
sub-string  by  the  <numeric-2>  argument.  Both  of  the  numeric  argu- 
ments can  have  values  ranging  from  0 to  255. 

If  the  <numeric-l>  value  is  greater  than  the  length  of  the  <string>, 
or  if  the  <numeric-2>  value  is  zero,  then  MID$  gives  a null  string  value. 
If  the  <numeric-2>  argument  is  left  out,  then  the  computer  will  assume 
that  a length  of  the  rest  of  the  string  is  to  be  used.  And  if  the  source 
string  has  fewer  characters  than  <numeric-2>,  from  the  starting  posi- 
tion to  the  end  of  the  string  argument,  then  the  whole  rest  of  the  string  is 
used. 

EXAMPLE  of  MID$  Function: 

10  A$="GOOD" 

20  B$="MORNING  EVENING  AFTERNOON" 

30  PRINT  A$  + MID$(B$,  8,  8) 

GOOD  EVENING 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  61 


NEW 


TYPE:  Command 
FORMAT:  NEW 

Action:  The  NEW  command  is  used  to  delete  the  program  currently  in 
memory  and  clear  all  variables.  Before  typing  in  a new  program,  NEW 
should  be  used  in  direct  mode  to  clear  memory.  NEW  can  also  be  used 
in  a program,  but  you  should  be  aware  of  the  fact  that  it  will  erase 
everything  that  has  gone  before  and  is  still  in  the  computer's  memory. 
This  can  be  particularly  troublesome  when  you're  trying  to  debug  your 
program. 

BE  CAREFUL:  Not  clearing  out  an  old  program  before  typing  a new  one  can  result  in 
a confusing  mix  of  the  two  programs. 

EXAMPLES  of  NEW  Command: 

NEW  (Clears  the  program  and  all  variables) 

10  NEW  (Performs  a NEW  operation  and  STOPs  the  program.) 

NEXT 


TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  NEXT  [<counter>]  [,<counter>]  .... 

The  NEXT  statement  is  used  with  FOR  to  establish  the  end  of  a 
FOR.  . . NEXT  loop.  The  NEXT  need  not  be  physically  the  last  statement 
in  the  loop,  but  it  is  always  the  last  statement  executed  in  a loop.  The 
<counter>  is  the  loop  index's  variable  name  used  with  FOR  to  start  the 
loop.  A single  NEXT  can  stop  several  nested  loops  when  it  is  followed  by 
each  FOR's  <counter>  variable  name(s).  To  do  this  each  name  must 
appear  in  the  order  of  inner-most  nested  loop  first,  to  outer-most  nested 
loop  last.  When  using  a single  NEXT  to  increment  and  stop  several  vari- 
able names,  each  variable  name  must  be  separated  by  commas.  Loops 
can  be  nested  to  9 levels.  If  the  counter  variable(s)  are  omitted,  the 
counter  associated  with  the  FOR  of  the  current  level  (of  the  nested  loops) 
is  incremented. 


62 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


When  the  NEXT  is  reached,  the  counter  value  is  incremented  by  1 or 
by  an  optional  STEP  value.  It  is  then  tested  against  an  end-value  to  see 
if  it's  time  to  stop  the  loop.  A loop  will  be  stopped  when  a NEXT  is  found 
which  has  its  counter  value  greater  than  the  end-value. 

EXAMPLES  of  NEXT  Statement: 

10  FOR  J = 1 TO  5:  FOR  K = 10  TO  20:  FOR  N = 5 TO  -5  STEP  -1 


20  NEXT  N,  K,  J 


(Stopping  Nested  Loops) 


10  FOR  L = 1 TO  100 
20  FOR  M = 1 TO  10 
30  NEXT  M 

400  NEXT  L (Note  how  the  loops  do  NOT  cross  each 

other) 


10  FOR  A = 1 TO  10 
20  FOR  B = 1 TO  20 
30  NEXT 
40  NEXT 


(Notice  that  no  variable  names  are 
needed) 


NOT 

TYPE:  Logical  Operator 
FORMAT:  NOT  <expre$sion> 

Action: The  NOT  logical  operator  "complements"  the  value  of  each  bit 
in  its  single  operand,  producing  an  integer  "twos-complement"  result.  In 
other  words,  the  NOT  is  really  saying,  "if  it  isn't.  . . ".  When  working 
with  a floating-point  number,  the  operands  are  converted  to  integers 
and  any  fractions  are  lost.  The  NOT  operator  can  also  be  used  in  a 
comparison  to  reverse  the  true/false  value  which  was  the  result  of  a 
relationship  test  and  therefore  it  will  reverse  the  meaning  of  the  com- 
parison. In  the  first  example  below,  if  the  "twos-complement"  of  "AA"  is 
equal  to  "BB"  and  if  "BB"  is  NOT  equal  to  "CC"  then  the  expression  is 
true. 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  63 


EXAMPLES  of  NOT  Operator: 

10  IF  NOT  AA  = BB  AND  NOT(BB  = CC)  THEN  .... 

NN%  = NOT  96:  PRINT  NN% 

-97 

NOTE;  To  find  the  value  of  NOT  use  the  expression  X = (— (X+l)).  (The  two's  comple- 
ment of  any  integer  is  the  bit  complement  plus  one.) 


ON 

TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  ON  <variable>  GOTO  / GOSUB  Cline- 
number>  [,<lme-number>]  .... 

Action:  The  ON  statement  is  used  to  GOTO  one  of  several  given  line- 
numbers,  depending  upon  the  value  of  a variable.  The  value  of  the 
variables  can  range  from  zero  through  the  number  of  lines  given.  If  the 
value  is  a non-integer,  the  fractional  portion  is  left  off.  For  example,  if 
the  variable  value  is  3,  ON  will  GOTO  the  third  line-number  in  the  list. 

If  the  value  of  the  variable  is  negative,  the  BASIC  error  message 
?ILLEGAL  QUANTITY  occurs.  If  the  number  is  zero,  or  greater  than  the 
number  of  items  in  the  list,  the  program  just  "ignores"  the  statement  and 
continues  with  the  statement  following  the  ON  statement. 

ON  is  really  an  underused  variant  of  the  IF.  . .THEN.  . . statement. 
Instead  of  using  a whole  lot  of  IF  statements  each  of  which  sends  the 
program  to  1 specific  line,  1 ON  statement  can  replace  a list  of  IF 
statements.  When  you  look  at  the  first  example  you  should  notice  that 
the  1 ON  statement  replaces  4 IF.  . .THEN.  . . statements. 

EXAMPLES  of  ON  Statement: 

ON  -(A  = 7)-2*(A=3)-  3*(A<3)-4*(A>7)GOTO  400,900,1000,100 

ON  X GOTO  100,130,180,220 

ON  X+3  GOSUB  9000,20,9000 

100  ON  NUM  GOTO  150,  300,  320,  390 

500  ON  SUM  / 2 + 1 GOSUB  50,  80,  20 


64  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


OPEN 


TYPE:  I/O  Statement 

FORMAT:  OPEN  <file-num>,  [<device>]  [,<address>] 
[,"<file-name>  [,<type>]  [,<mode>]"] 


Action:  This  statement  OPENs  a channel  for  input  and/or  output  to  a 
peripheral  device.  However,  you  may  NOT  need  all  those  parts  for 
every  OPEN  statement.  Some  OPEN  statements  require  only  2 codes: 

1)  LOGICAL  FILE  NUMBER 

2)  DEVICE  NUMBER 

The  <file-num>  is  the  logical  file  number,  which  relates  the  OPEN, 
CLOSE,  CMD,  GET#,  INPUT#,  and  PRINT#  statements  to  each  other 
and  associates  them  with  the  file-name  and  the  piece  of  equipment 
being  used.  The  logical  file  number  can  range  from  1 to  255  and  you 
can  assign  it  any  number  you  want  in  that  range. 


NOTE  pile  numbers  over  128  were  really  designed  for  other  uses  so  it's  good  practice 
to  use  only  numbers  below  127  for  file  numbers. 


Each  peripheral  device  (printer,  disk  drive,  cassette)  in  the  system  has 
its  own  number  which  it  answers  to.  The  <device>  number  is  used  with 
OPEN  to  specify  on  which  device  the  data  file  exists.  Peripherals  like 
cassette  decks,  disk  drives  or  printers  also  answer  to  several  secondary 
addresses.  Think  of  these  as  codes  which  tell  each  device  what  opera- 
tion to  perform.  The  device  logical  file  number  is  used  with  every  GET#, 
INPUT#,  and  PRINT#. 

If  the  <device>  number  is  left  out  the  computer  will  automatically 
assume  that  you  want  your  information  to  be  sent  to  and  received  from 
the  Datassette™,  which  is  device  number  1.  The  file-name  can  also  be 
left  out,  but  later  on  in  your  program,  you  can  NOT  call  the  file  by  name 
if  you  have  not  already  given  it  one.  When  you  are  storing  files  on  cas- 
sette tape,  the  computer  will  assume  that  the  secondary  <address>  is 
zero  (0)  if  you  omit  the  secondary  address  (a  READ  operation). 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


65 


A secondary  address  value  of  one  (1)  OPENs  cassette  tape  files  for 
writing.  A secondary  address  value  of  two  (2)  causes  an  end-of-tape 
marker  to  be  written  when  the  file  is  later  closed.  The  end-of-tape 
marker  prevents  accidentally  reading  past  the  end  of  data  which  results 
in  the  BASIC  error  message  ?DEVICE  NOT  PRESENT. 

For  disk  files,  the  secondary  addresses  2 thru  14  are  available  for 
data-files,  but  other  numbers  have  special  meanings  in  DOS  commands. 
You  must  use  a secondary  address  when  using  your  disk  drive(s).  (See 
your  disk  drive  manual  for  DOS  command  details.) 

The  <file-name>  is  a string  of  1 — 16  characters  and  is  optional  for 
cassette  or  printer  files.  If  the  file  <type>  is  left  out  the  type  of  file  will 
automatically  default  to  the  Program  file  unless  the  <mode>  is  given. 
Sequential  files  are  OPENed  for  reading  <mode>  = R unless  you  specify 
that  files  should  be  OPENed  for  writing  <mode>  = W is  specified.  A file 
<type>  can  be  used  to  OPEN  an  existing  Relative  file.  Use  REL  for 
<type>  with  Relative  files.  Relative  and  Sequential  files  are  for  disk 
only. 

If  you  try  to  access  a file  before  it  is  OPENed  the  BASIC  error  message 
?FILE  NOT  OPEN  will  occur.  If  you  try  to  OPEN  a file  for  reading  which 
does  not  exist  the  BASIC  error  message  ?FILE  NOT  FOUND  will  occur.  If 
a file  is  OPENed  to  disk  for  writing  and  the  file-name  already  exists,  the 
DOS  error  message  FILE  EXISTS  occurs.  There  is  no  check  of  this  type 
available  for  tape  files,  so  be  sure  that  the  tape  is  properly  positioned  or 
you  might  accidentally  write  over  some  data  that  had  previously  been 
SAVEd.  If  a file  is  OPENed  that  is  already  OPEN,  the  BASIC  error  mes- 
sage FILE  OPEN  occurs.  (See  Printer  Manual  for  further  details.) 


66  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


EXAMPLES  of  OPEN  Statements: 


10  OPEN  2,  8,  4 "DISK-OUTPUT, 
SEQ,W" 

10  OPEN  1,1,2,  "TAPE-WRITE" 
10  OPEN  50,  0 
10  OPEN  12,  3 
10  OPEN  130,  4 
10  OPEN  1,1,0,  "NAME" 

10  OPEN  1,1,1,  "NAME" 

10  OPEN  1,2,0,  CHR$  (10) 

10  OPEN  1,4,0,  "STRING" 

10  OPEN  1,4,7,  "STRING" 

10  OPEN  1,5,7,  "STRING" 

10  OPEN  1,8,15,  "COMMAND" 


(Opens  sequential  file  on  disk) 

(Write  End-of-File  on  Close) 

(Keyboard  input) 

(Screen  output) 

(Printer  output) 

(Read  from  cassette) 

(Write  to  cassette) 

(Open  channel  to  RS-232  device) 

(Send  upper  case/graphics  to 
the  printer) 

(Send  upper/lower  case  to 
printer) 

(Send  upper/lower  case  to 
printer  with  device  # 5) 

(Send  a command  to  disk) 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


67 


OR 


TYPE:  Logical  Operator 

FORMAT:  <operand>  OR  <operand> 


Action  Just  as  the  relational  operators  can  be  used  to  make  decisions 
regarding  program  flow,  logical  operators  can  connect  two  or  more  re- 
lations and  return  a true  or  false  value  which  can  then  be  used  in  a 
decision.  When  used  in  calculations,  the  logical  OR  gives  you  a bit  result 
of  1 if  the  corresponding  bit  of  either  or  both  operands  is  1.  This  will 
produce  an  integer  as  a result  depending  on  the  values  of  the  operands. 
When  used  in  comparisons  the  logical  OR  operator  is  also  used  to  link 
two  expressions  into  a single  compound  expression.  If  either  of  the  ex- 
pressions are  true,  the  combined  expression  value  is  true  (—1).  In  the 
first  example  below  if  AA  is  equal  to  BB  OR  if  XX  is  20,  the  expression  is 
true. 

Logical  operators  work  by  converting  their  operands  to  16-bit,  signed, 
two's  complement  integers  in  the  range  of  —32768  to  +32767.  If  the 
operands  are  not  in  the  range  an  error  message  results.  Each  bit  of  the 
result  is  determined  by  the  corresponding  bits  in  the  two  operands. 


EXAMPLES  of  OR  Operator: 

100  IF  (AA  = BB)  OR  (XX  = 20)  THEN  .... 

230  KK%  = 64  OR  32:  PRINT  KK%  (You  typed  this  with  a bit 

value  of  1000000  for  64 
and  100000  for  32) 

96  (The  computer  responded 

with  bit  value  1100000. 
1100000=96.) 


68 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


PEEK 


TYPE:  Integer  Function 
FORMAT:  PEEK  (<numeric>) 

Action:  Returns  an  integer  in  the  range  of  0 to  255,  which  is  read 
from  a memory  location.  The  <numeric>  expression  is  a memory  loca- 
tion which  must  be  in  the  range  of  0 to  65535.  If  it  isn't  then  the  BASIC 
error  message  7ILLEGAL  QUANTITY  occurs. 

EXAMPLES  of  PEEK  Function: 

10  PRINT  PEEK(53280)  AND  15  (Returns  value  of  screen 

border  color) 

5 A%  =PEEK(45)  + PEEK(46)*256  (Returns  address  of  BASIC 

variable  table) 

POKE 

TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  POKE  <location>,  <value> 

Action:  The  POKE  statement  is  used  to  write  a one-byte  (8-bits)  binary 
value  into  a given  memory  location  or  input/output  register.  The 
<location>  is  an  arithmetic  expression  which  must  equal  a value  in  the 
range  of  0 to  65535.  The  <value>  is  an  expression  which  can  be  re- 
duced to  an  integer  value  of  0 to  255.  If  either  value  is  out  of  its  respec- 
tive range,  the  BASIC  error  message  ?ILLEGAL  QUANTITY  occurs. 

The  POKE  statement  and  PEEK  statement  (which  is  a built-in  function 
that  looks  at  a memory  location)  are  useful  for  data  storage,  controlling 
graphics  displays  or  sound  generation,  loading  assembly  language  sub- 
routines, and  passing  arguments  and  results  to  and  from  assembly  lan- 
guage subroutines.  In  addition,  Operating  System  parameters  can  be 
examined  using  PEEK  statements  or  changed  and  manipulated  using 
POKE  statements.  A complete  memory  map  of  useful  locations  is  given 
in  Appendix  G. 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


69 


EXAMPLES  of  POKE  Statement: 

POKE  1024,  1 (Puts  an  "A"  at  position  1 on  the  screen) 

POKE  2040,  PTR  (Updates  Sprite  #0  data  pointer) 

10  POKE  RED,  32 
20  POKE  36879,  8 
2050  POKE  A,  B 

POS 

TYPE:  Integer  Function 
FORMAT:  POS  (<dummy>) 

Action:  Tells  you  the  current  cursor  position  which,  of  course,  is  in  the 
range  of  0 (leftmost  character)  though  position  79  on  an  80-character 
logical  screen  line.  Since  the  Commodore  64  has  a 40-column  screen, 
any  position  from  40  through  79  will  refer  to  the  second  screen  line.  The 
dummy  argument  is  ignored. 

EXAMPLE  of  POS  Function: 

1000  IF  POS(O)  > 38  THEN  PRINT  CHR$(13) 

PRINT 

TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  PRINT  [<variable>]  [ <,/;><variable>]  .... 

Action:  The  PRINT  statement  is  normally  used  to  write  data  items  to 
the  screen.  However,  the  CAAD  statement  may  be  used  to  re-direct  that 
output  to  any  other  device  in  the  system.  The  <variable(s)>  in  the 
output-list  are  expressions  of  any  type.  If  no  output-list  is  present,  a 
blank  line  is  printed.  The  position  of  each  printed  item  is  determined  by 
the  punctuation  used  to  separate  items  in  the  output-list. 

The  punctuation  characters  that  you  can  use  are  blanks,  commas,  or 
semicolons.  The  80-character  logical  screen  line  is  divided  into  8 print 
zones  of  10  spaces  each.  In  the  list  of  expressions,  a comma  causes  the 
next  value  to  be  printed  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  zone.  A semicolon 
causes  the  next  value  to  be  printed  immediately  following  the  previous 
value.  However,  there  are  two  exceptions  to  this  rule: 


70  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


1)  Numeric  items  are  followed  by  an  added  space. 

2)  Positive  numbers  have  a space  preceding  them. 

When  you  use  blanks  or  no  punctuation  between  string  constants  or 
variable  names  it  has  the  same  effect  as  a semicolon.  However,  blanks 
between  a string  and  a numeric  item  or  between  two  numeric  items  will 
stop  output  without  printing  the  second  item. 

If  a comma  or  a semicolon  is  at  the  end  of  the  output-list,  the  next 
PRINT  statement  begins  printing  on  the  same  line,  and  spaced  accord- 
ingly. If  no  punctuation  finishes  the  list,  a carriage-return  and  a line- 
feed are  printed  at  the  end  of  the  data.  The  next  PRINT  statement  will 
begin  on  the  next  line.  If  your  output  is  directed  to  the  screen  and  the 
data  printed  is  longer  than  40  columns,  the  output  is  continued  on  the 
next  screen  line. 

There  is  no  statement  in  BASIC  with  more  variety  than  the  PRINT 
statement.  There  are  so  many  symbols,  functions,  and  parameters 
associated  with  this  statement  that  it  might  almost  be  considered  as  a 
language  of  its  own  within  BASIC;  a language  specially  designed  for 
writing  on  the  screen. 


EXAMPLES  of  PRINT  Statement; 

D 


5 X = 5 

10  PRINT  — 5*X,  X— 5,  X+5,  X f 5 
-25  0 10  3125 


5 X=9 

10  PRINT  X;"SQUARED  IS";X*X;"AND"; 

20  PRINT  X "CUBED  IS"  X f 3 

9 SQUARED  IS  81  AND  9 CUBED  IS  729 

3) 

90  AA$="ALPHA":BB$="BAKER":  CC$="CHARLIE":DD$="DOG": 
EE$="ECHO" 

100  PRINT  AA$BB$;CC$  DD$,EE$ 

ALPHABAKERCHARLIEDOG  ECHO 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  71 


Quote  Mode 


Once  the  quote  mark  ( QJQQ  Q ) is  typed,  the  cursor  controls  stop 
operating  and  start  displaying  reversed  characters  which  actually  stand 
for  the  cursor  control  you  are  hitting.  This  allows  you  to  program  these 
cursor  controls,  because  once  the  text  inside  the  quotes  is  PRINTed  they 
perform  their  functions.  The  BHBBW  key  is  the  only  cursor  control 
not  affected  by  "quote  mode." 


1 .  Cursor  Movement 

The  cursor  controls  which  can  be  "programmed"  in  quote  mode  are: 


KEY 


U CLR/HOME 

shifTclr/home 


SHIFT  |H  CRSR  U 
[^CRSR=> 
SHIFT  I<=CRSR=> 


APPEARS  AS 


□ 

□ 

□ 


D 


If  you  wanted  the  word  HELLO  to  PRINT  diagonally  from  the  upper  left 
corner  of  the  screen,  you  would  type: 


CLR  /HOME 

1 HI 

It  CRSR  U 

1 E | 

If  CRSR  U 

1 L| 

IT  CRSR  J] 

1 L | 

TT  CRSR  U 

PRINT 

which  would  appear  as: 
PRINT  " El  H Q 


L 


2.  Reverse  Characters 

Holding  down  the  key  anc^  hitting  will  cause  to  ap- 

pear inside  the  quotes.  This  will  make  all  characters  start  printing  in 
reverse  video  (like  a negative  of  a picture).  To  end  the  reverse  printing 
hit  H|  , which  prints  a or  else  PRINT  a (CHR$(13)). 

(Just  ending  the  PRINT  statement  without  a semicolon  or  comma  will 
take  care  of  this.) 

3.  Color  Controls 

Holding  down  the  QEB  key  or  Q key  with  any  of  the  8 color  keys 
will  make  a special  reversed  character  appear  in  the  quotes.  When  the 
character  is  PRINTed,  then  the  color  change  will  occur. 


72 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


KEY 


BO 

BQ 

BO 

BO 

BO 

BQ 

BO 

BQ 


COLOR 

APPEAR 

Black 

■ 

White 

11 

Red 

B 

Cyan 

H 

Purple 

HU 

Green 

D 

Blue 

B 

Yellow 

m 

Orange 

n 

Brown 

i§ 

Light  Red 

X 

Grey  1 

m 

Grey  2 

□ 

Light  Green 

■i 

Light  Blue 

□ 

Grey  3 

■■ 

■■ 

If  you  wanted  to  PRINT  the  word  HELLO  in  cyan  and  the  word  THERE 
in  white,  type: 


PRINT  " KSrm  Q HELLO 


which  would  appear  as: 


THERE" 


PRINT  " K HELLO  Q THERE" 

4.  Insert  Mode 

The  spaces  created  by  using  the  key  have  some  of  the  same 

characteristics  as  quote  mode.  The  cursor  controls  and  color  controls 
show  up  as  reversed  characters.  The  only  difference  is  in  the  |^3and 
[- (pjjpr|  / which  performs  its  normal  function  even  in  quote  mode,  now 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  73 


creates  the  Q . And  , which  created  a special  character  in 

quote  mode,  inserts  spaces  normally. 

Because  of  this,  it  is  possible  to  create  a PRINT  statement  containing 
DELetes,  which  cannot  be  PRINTed  in  quote  mode.  Here  is  an  example 
of  how  this  is  done: 


10  PRINT"HELLO" 


INST/DEL 


INST/DEL  I SHIFT!  INST/DEL  I SHIFT  I INST/DEL  | INST/DEL 


which  displays  as 


10  PRINT"HELLO  QQ  P" 

When  the  above  line  is  RUN,  the  word  displayed  will  be  HELP,  be- 
cause the  last  two  letters  are  deleted  and  the  P is  put  in  their  place. 


WARNING:  The  DELetes  will  work  when  LISTing  as  well  as  PRINTing,  so  editing  a 
line  with  these  characters  will  be  difficult. 


Th* 


'insert  mode"  condition  is  ended  when  the 
(or  ) key  is  hit,  or  when  as  many  characters  have 

been  typed  as  spaces  were  inserted. 


5.  Other  Special  Characters 

There  are  some  other  characters  that  can  be  PRINTed  for  special 
functions,  although  they  are  not  easily  available  from  the  keyboard.  In 
order  to  get  these  into  quotes,  you  must  leave  empty  spaces  for  them  in 
the  line,  hit  IrUUWM  or  QJQ3  KBfflEM  , and  go  back  to  the 
spaces  with  the  cursor  controls.  Now  you  must  hit  • 

to  start  typing  reversed  characters,  and  type  the  keys  shown  below: 


Function 


SHIFT  RETURN 


switch  to  lower  case 
switch  to  upper  case 
disable  case-switching  keys 
enable  case-switching  keys 


Type 


SHIFT 


O 


SHIFT 


Appears  As 

S 


a 

* 

o 


74  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


i 


The  k&MilMbl  will  work  in  the  LISTing  as  well  as  PRINT- 

ing,  so  editing  will  be  almost  impossible  if  this  character  is  used.  The 
LISTing  will  also  look  very  strange. 


PRINT# 


TYPE:  I/O  Statement 

FORMAT:  PRINT#<file-number>  [<variable>] 
[<,/;><variable>]  .... 


Actions:  The  PRINT#  statement  is  used  to  write  data  items  to  a logical 
file.  It  must  use  the  same  number  used  to  OPEN  the  file.  Output  goes  to 
the  device-number  used  in  the  OPEN  statement.  The  <variable>  ex- 
pressions in  the  output-list  can  be  of  any  type.  The  punctuation  char- 
acters between  items  are  the  same  as  with  the  PRINT  statement  and 
they  can  be  used  in  the  same  ways.  The  effects  of  punctuation  are 
different  in  two  significant  respects. 

When  PRINT#  is  used  with  tape  files,  the  comma,  instead  of  spacing 
by  print  zones,  has  the  same  effect  as  a semicolon.  Therefore,  whether 
blanks,  commas,  semicolons  or  no  punctuation  characters  are  used  be- 
tween data  items,  the  effect  on  spacing  is  the  same.  The  data  items  are 
written  as  a continuous  stream  of  characters.  Numeric  items  are  fol- 
lowed by  a space  and,  if  positive,  are  preceded  by  a space. 

If  no  punctuation  finishes  the  list,  a carriage-return  and  a line-feed 
are  written  at  the  end  of  the  data.  If  a comma  or  semicolon  terminates 
the  output-list,  the  carriage-return  and  line-feed  are  suppressed.  Re- 
gardless of  the  punctuation,  the  next  PRINT#  statement  begins  output  in 
the  next  available  character  position.  The  line-feed  will  act  as  a stop 
when  using  the  INPUT#  statement,  leaving  an  empty  variable  when  the 
next  INPUT#  is  executed.  The  line-feed  can  be  suppressed  or  compen- 
sated for  as  shown  in  the  examples  below. 

The  easiest  way  to  write  more  than  one  variable  to  a file  on  tape  or 
disk  is  to  set  a string  variable  to  CHR$(13),  and  use  that  string  in  be- 
tween all  the  other  variables  when  writing  the  file. 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


75 


EXAMPLES  of  PRINT#  Statement: 

1) 


10  OPEN  1,1,1,  "TAPE  FILE" 

20  R$  = CHR$(13) 

30  PRINT#  1,1  ;R$;2;R$;3;R$;4;R$;5 
40  PRINT#  1,6 
50  PRINT#  1,7 


(By  Changing  the  CHR$(13)  to 
CHR$(44)  you  put  a ","  between 
each  variable.  CHR$(59)  would 
put  a ";"  between  each 
variable.) 


2) 


10  CO$=CHR$(44):  CR$=CHR$(13) 
20  PRINT#1,  "AAA"CO$" B B B", 
"CCC";"DDD","EEE"CR$ 
"FFF"CR$; 

30  INPUT#1,  A$,BCDE$,F$ 


AAA,BBB  CCCDDDEEE 
(carriage  return) 
FFF(carriage  return) 


3) 


5 CR$=CHR$(13) 

10  PRINT#2,  "AAA";CR$,"BBB" 
20  PRINT#2,  "CCC"; 

30  INPUT#2,  A$,B$,DUMMY$,C$ 


(10  blanks)  AAA 
BBB 

(10  blanks)CCC 


READ 


TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  READ  <variabie>  [,<variable>] 


stant,  nlrl  statement  is  used  to  fill  variable  names  from  con- 

stants ,n  DATA  statements.  The  data  actually  read  must  agree  with  the 
variable  types  specified  or  the  BASIC  error  message  7SYNTAX  ERROR 
V"toW“  1»  “ATA  input-list  must  JsupatC.d  by  "m 

A single  READ  statement  can  access  one  or  more  DATA  statements 
which  will  be  accessed  in  order  (see  DATA),  or  several  READ  statements 
can  access  the  same  DATA  statement.  If  more  READ  statements  are  exe- 
cuted than  the  number  of  elements  in  DATA  statements(s)  in  the  pro- 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


gram,  the  BASIC  error  message  ?OUT  OF  DATA  is  printed.  If  the 
number  of  variables  specified  is  fewer  than  the  number  of  elements  in 
the  DATA  statements),  subsequent  READ  statements  will  continue  read- 
ing at  the  next  data  element.  (See  RESTORE.) 


* NOTE:  The  ?SYNTAX  ERROR  will  appear  with  the  line  number  from  the  DATA  state- 
ment, NOT  the  READ  statement. 

EXAMPLES  of  READ  Statement: 

110  READ  A,B,C$ 

120  DATA  1,2, HELLO 

100  FOR  X=  1 TO  10:  READ  A(X):NEXT 

200  DATA  3.08,  5.19,  3.12,  3.98,  4.24 
210  DATA  5.08,  5.55,  4.00,  3.16,  3.37 

(Fills  array  items  (line  1)  in  order  of  constants  shown  (line  5)) 

1 READ  CITY$, STATES, ZIP 
5 DATA  DENVER, COLORADO,  80211 

REM 

TYPE:  Statement 
FORMAT:  REM  [<remark>] 

Action:  The  REM  statement  makes  your  programs  more  easily  under- 
stood when  LISTed.  It's  a reminder  to  yourself  to  tell  you  what  you  had  in 
mind  when  you  were  writing  each  section  of  the  program.  For  instance, 
you  might  want  to  remember  what  a variable  is  used  for,  or  some  other 
useful  information.  The  REMark  can  be  any  text,  word,  or  character 
including  the  colon  (:)  or  BASIC  keywords. 

The  REM  statement  and  anything  following  it  on  the  same  line-number 
are  ignored  by  BASIC,  but  REMarks  are  printed  exactly  as  entered  when 
the  program  is  listed.  A REM  statement  can  be  referred  to  by  a GOTO  or 
GOSUB  statement,  and  the  execution  of  the  program  will  continue  with 
the  next  higher  program  line  having  executable  statements. 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


77 


EXAMPLES  of  REM  Statement: 


10  REM  CALCULATE  AVERAGE  VELOCITY 
20  FOR  X=1  TO  20  :REM  LOOP  FOR  TWENTY  VALUES 
30  SUM=SUM  + VEL(X):  NEXT 
40  AVG=SUM/20 


RESTORE 

TYPE:  Statement 
FORMAT:  RESTORE 


Action  BASIC  maintains  an  internal  pointer  to  the  next  DATA  constant 
to  be  READ.  This  pointer  can  be  reset  to  the  first  DATA  constant  in  a 
program  using  the  RESTORE  statement.  The  RESTORE  statement  can  be 
used  anywhere  in  the  program  to  begin  re-READing  DATA. 


EXAMPLES  of  RESTORE  Statement: 

100  FOR  X=1  TO  10:  READ  A(X):  NEXT 
200  RESTORE 

300  FOR  Y=1  TO  10:  READ  B(Y):  NEXT 

4000  DATA  3.08,  5.19,  3.12,  3.98,  4.24 
4100  DATA  5.08,  5.55,  4.00,  3.16,  3.37 


(Fills  the  two  arrays  with  identical  data) 

10  DATA  1,2,3, 4 
20  DATA  5, 6,7,8 
30  FOR  L=  1 TO  8 
40  READ  A:  PRINT  A 
50  NEXT 
60  RESTORE 
70  FOR  L=  1 TO  8 
80  READ  A:  PRINT  A 
90  NEXT 

78  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


RETURN 


TYPE:  Statement 
FORMAT:  RETURN 

Action:  The  RETURN  statement  is  used  to  exit  from  a subroutine  called 
for  by  a GOSUB  statement.  RETURN  restarts  the  rest  of  your  program  at 
the  next  executable  statement  following  the  GOSUB.  If  you  are  nesting 
subroutines,  each  GOSUB  must  be  paired  with  at  least  one  RETURN 
statement.  A subroutine  can  contain  any  number  of  RETURN  statements, 
but  the  first  one  encountered  will  exit  the  subroutine. 

EXAMPLE  of  RETURN  Statement: 

10  PRINT  "THIS  IS  THE  PROGRAM" 

20  GOSUB  1000 

30  PRINT  "PROGRAM  CONTINUES" 

40  GOSUB  1000 

50  PRINT  "MORE  PROGRAM" 

60  END 

1000  PRINT  "THIS  IS  THE  GOSUB":RETURN 

RIGHTS 

TYPE:  String  Function 

FORMAT:  RIGHT$  (<string>,  <numeric>) 

Action:  The  RIGHT$  function  returns  a sub-string  taken  from  the  right- 
most end  of  the  <string>  argument.  The  length  of  the  sub-string  is 
defined  by  the  <numeric>  argument  which  can  be  any  integer  in  the 
range  of  0 to  255.  If  the  value  of  the  numeric  expression  is  zero,  then  a 
null  string  ("")  is  returned.  If  the  value  you  give  in  the  <numeric> 
argument  is  greater  than  the  length  of  the  <string>  then  the  entire 
string  is  returned. 

EXAMPLE  of  RIGHT$  Function: 

10  MSG$  = "COMMODORE  COMPUTERS" 

20  PRINT  RIGHT$(MSG$,9) 

RUN 

COMPUTERS 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  79 


RND 


TYPE:  Floating-Point  Function 
FORMAT:  RND  (<numeric>) 


Action:  RND  creates  a floating-point  random  from  0.0  to  1.0.  The 
computer  generates  a sequence  of  random  numbers  by  performing  cal- 
culations on  a starting  number,  which  in  computer  jargon  is  called  a 
seed.  The  RND  function  is  seeded  on  system  power-up.  The  <numeric> 
argument  is  a dummy,  except  for  its  sign  (positive,  zero,  or  negative). 

If  the  <numeric>  argument  is  positive,  the  same  "pseudorandom" 
sequence  of  numbers  is  returned,  starting  from  a given  seed  value.  Dif- 
ferent number  sequences  will  result  from  different  seeds,  but  any  se- 
quence is  repeatable  by  starting  from  the  same  seed  number.  Having  a 
known  sequence  of  "random"  numbers  is  useful  in  testing  programs. 

If  you  choose  a <numeric>  argument  of  zero,  then  RND  generates  a 
number  directly  from  a free-running  hardware  clock  (the  system  "jiffy 
clock").  Negative  arguments  cause  the  RND  function  to  be  re-seeded 
with  each  function  call. 


EXAMPLES  of  RND  Function: 


220  PRINT  INT(RND(0)*50) 


(Return  random  integers 
0-49) 


100  X=INT(RND(l)*6)  + INT(RND(l)*6)+2  (Simulates  2 dice) 


100  X=INT(RND(1)*  1000)4- 1 


(Random  integers  from 
1-1000) 


100  X=INT(RND(1)*150)  + 100 


(Random  numbers  from 
100-249) 


100  X=RND(1)*(U  — L)  + L 


(Random  numbers  between 
upper  (U)  and  lower 
(L)  limits) 


80  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


RUN 


TYPE:  Command 

FORMAT:  RUN  [<line-number>] 

Action:  The  system  command  RUN  is  used  to  start  the  program  cur- 
rently in  memory.  The  RUN  command  causes  an  implied  CLR  operation 
to  be  performed  before  starting  the  program.  You  can  avoid  the  CleaR- 
ing  operation  by  using  CONT  or  GOTO  to  restart  a program  instead  of 
RUN.  If  a <line-number>  is  specified,  your  program  will  start  on  that 
line.  Otherwise,  the  RUN  command  starts  at  first  line  of  the  program. 
The  RUN  command  can  also  be  used  within  a program.  If  the  <line- 
number>  you  specify  doesn't  exist,  the  BASIC  error  message  UNDEF'D 
STATEMENT  occurs. 

A RUNning  program  stops  and  BASIC  returns  to  direct  mode  when  an 
END  or  STOP  statement  is  reached,  when  the  last  line  of  the  program  is 
finished,  or  when  a BASIC  error  occurs  during  execution. 

EXAMPLES  of  RUN  Command: 

RUN  (Starts  at  first  line  of  program) 

RUN  500  (Starts  at  line-number  500) 

RUN  X (Starts  at  line  X,  or  UNDEFD  STATEMENT  ERROR 
if  there  is  no  line  X) 


SAVE 


TYPE:  Command 

FORMAT:  SAVE  [//<flle-name>//]  [,<device-number>] 
[,<address>] 

Action:  The  SAVE  command  is  used  to  store  the  program  that  is  cur- 
rently in  memory  onto  a tape  or  diskette  file.  The  program  being  SAVEd 
is  only  affected  by  the  command  while  the  SAVE  is  happening.  The  pro- 
gram remains  in  the  current  computer  memory  even  after  the  SAVE  op- 
eration is  completed  until  you  put  something  else  there  by  using  another 
command.  The  file  type  will  be  "prg"  (program).  If  the  <device- 
number>  is  left  out,  then  the  C64  will  automatically  assume  that  you 
want  the  program  saved  on  cassette,  device  number  1.  If  the  <device- 
number>  is  an  <8>,  then  the  program  is  written  onto  disk.  The  SAVE 

BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  81 


statement  can  be  used  in  your  programs  and  execution  will  continue 
with  the  next  statement  after  the  SAVE  is  completed. 

Programs  on  tape  are  automatically  stored  twice,  so  that  your  Com- 
modore 64  can  check  for  errors  when  LOADing  the  program  back  in. 
When  saving  programs  to  tape,  the  <file-name>  and  secondary  <ad- 
dress>  are  optional.  But  following  a SAVE  with  a program  name  in 
quotes  ("  ")  or  by  a string  variable  (— $)  helps  your  Commodore  64  find 
each  program  more  easily.  If  the  file-name  is  left  out  it  can  NOT  be 
LOADed  by  name  later  on. 

A secondary  address  of  1 will  tell  the  KERNAL  to  LOAD  the  tape  at  a 
later  time,  with  the  program  currently  in  memory  instead  of  the  normal 
2048  location.  A secondary  address  of  2 will  cause  an  end-of-tape 
marker  to  follow  the  program.  A secondary  address  of  3 combines  both 
functions. 

When  saving  programs  onto  a disk,  the  <file-name>  must  be  pre- 
sent. 


EXAMPLES  of  SAVE  Command: 


SAVE 

SAVE  "ALPHA",  1 
SAVE  "ALPHA",  1,  2 
SAVE  "FUN.DISK",8 
SAVE  A$ 

10  SAVE  "HI" 

SAVE  "ME",  1,3 


(Write  to  tape  without  a name) 

(Store  on  tape  as  file-name  "alpha") 

(Store  "alpha"  with  end-of-tape  marker) 

(SAVES  on  disk  (device  8 is  the  disk)) 

(Store  on  tape  with  the  name  A$) 

(SAVEs  program  and  then  move  to  next 
program  line) 

(Stores  at  same  memory  location  and 
puts  an  end-of-tape  marker  on) 


82  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


SGN 


TYPE:  Integer  Function 
FORMAT:  SGN  (<numeric>) 

Action:  SGN  gives  you  an  integer  value  depending  upon  the  sign  of 
the  <numeric>  argument.  If  the  argument  is  positive  the  result  is  1,  if 
zero  the  result  is  also  0,  if  negative  the  result  is  —1. 

EXAMPLE  of  SGN  Function: 

90  ON  SGN(DV)+2  GOTO  100,  200,  300 

(jump  to  100  if  DV=negative,  200  if  DV=0,  300  if  DV=positive) 


SIN 

TYPE:  Floating-Point  Function 
FORMAT:  SIN  (<numeric>) 

Action:  SIN  gives  you  the  sine  of  the  <numeric>  argument,  in  ra- 
dians. The  value  of  COS(x)  is  equal  to  SIN(x+3. 14159265/2). 

EXAMPLE  of  SIN  Function: 

235  AA  = SIN(1.5):  PRINT  AA 
. 997494987 

SPC 

TYPE:  Special  Function 
FORMAT:  SPC  (<numeric>) 

Action:  The  SPC  function  is  used  to  control  the  formatting  of  data,  as 
either  an  output  to  the  screen  or  into  a logical  file.  The  number  of 
SPaCes  given  by  the  <numeric>  argument  are  printed,  starting  at  the 
first  available  position.  For  screen  or  tape  files  the  value  of  the  argument 
is  in  the  range  of  0 to  255  and  for  disk  files  up  to  254.  For  printer  files, 
an  automatic  carriage-return  and  line-feed  will  be  performed  by  the 
printer  if  a SPaCe  is  printed  in  the  last  character  position  of  a line.  No 
SPaCes  are  printed  on  the  following  line. 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  83 


EXAMPLE  of  SPC  Function: 


10  PRINT  "RIGHT  "HERE 

20  PRINT  SPC(5)  "OVER"  SPC(14)  "THERE" 

RUN 

RIGHT  HERE  & OVER  THERE 


SQR 

TYPE:  Floating-Point  Function 
FORMAT:  SQR  (<numeric>) 

Action:  SQR  gives  you  the  value  of  the  SQuare  Root  of  the 
<numeric>  argument.  The  value  of  the  argument  must  not  be  negative, 
or  the  BASIC  error  message  ?ILLEGAL  QUANTITY  will  happen. 

EXAMPLE  of  SQR  Function: 

FOR  J = 2 TO  5:  PRINT  J*5,  SQR(J  * 5):  NEXT 

10  3.16227766 

15  3.87298335 

20  4.47213595 

25  5 

READY 


STATUS 

TYPE:  Integer  Function 
FORMAT:  STATUS 

Action:  Returns  a completion  STATUS  for  the  last  input/output  opera- 
tion which  was  performed  on  an  open  file.  The  STATUS  can  be  read 
from  any  peripheral  device.  The  STATUS  (or  simply  ST)  keyword  is  a 


84 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


system  defined  variable-name  into  which  the  KERNAL  puts  the  STATUS  of 
I/O  operations.  A table  of  STATUS  code  values  for  tape,  printer,  disk 
and  RS-232  file  operations  is  shown  below: 


ST  Bit 

Position 

ST  Numeric 

Value 

Cassette 

Read 

Serial 

Bus  R/W 

Tape  Verify 
+ Load 

0 

1 

time  out 

write 

1 

2 

time  out 

read 

2 

4 

short  block 

short  block 

3 

8 

long  block 

long  block 

4 

16 

unrecoverable 
read  error 

any  mismatch 

5 

32 

checksum 

error 

checksum 

error 

6 

64 

end  of  file 

EOI 

7 

-128 

end  of  tape 

device  not 
present 

end  of  tape 

EXAMPLES  of  STATUS  Function: 

10  OPEN  1,  4:  OPEN  2,  8,  4,  "MASTER  FILE,SEQ,W" 

20  GOSUB  100:  REM  CHECK  STATUS 
30  INPUT#2,  A$,  B,  C 

40  IF  STATUS  AND  64  THEN  80:  REM  HANDLE  END-OF-FILE 

50  GOSUB  100:  REM  CHECK  STATUS 

60  PRINT#1,  A$,  B;  C 

70  GOTO  20 

80  CLOSE  1:  CLOSE2 

90  GOSUB  100:  END 

100  IF  ST  > 0 THEN  9000:  REM  HANDLE  FILE  I/O  ERROR 
110  RETURN 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  85 


STEP 


TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  [STEP  <expression>] 

Action:  The  optional  STEP  keyword  follows  the  <end-value>  expres- 
sion in  a FOR  statement.  It  defines  an  increment  value  for  the  loop 
counter  variable.  Any  value  can  be  used  as  the  STEP  increment.  Of 
course,  a STEP  value  of  zero  will  loop  forever.  If  the  STEP  keyword  is  left 
out,  the  increment  value  will  be  + 1 . When  the  NEXT  statement  in  a FOR 
loop  is  reached,  the  STEP  increment  happens.  Then  the  counter  is  tested 
against  the  end-value  to  see  if  the  loop  is  finished.  (See  FOR  statement 
for  more  information.) 


NOTE:  The  STEP  value  can  NOT  be  changed  once  it's  in  the  loop. 

EXAMPLES  of  STEP  Statement: 

25  FOR  XX  = 2 TO  20  STEP  2 (Loop  repeats  10  times) 

35  FOR  ZZ  = 0 TO  -20  STEP  -2  (Loop  repeats  1 1 times) 

STOP 

TYPE:  Statement 
FORMAT:  STOP 


Action:  The  STOP  statement  is  used  to  halt  execution  of  the  current 
program  and  return  to  direct  mode.  Typing  the  key  on  the 

keyboard  has  the  same  effect  as  a STOP  statement.  The  BASIC  error 
message  ?BREAK  IN  LINE  nnnnn  is  displayed  on  the  screen,  followed 
by  READY.  The  "nnnnn"  is  the  line-number  where  the  STOP  occurs.  Any 
open  files  remain,  open  and  all  variables  are  preserved  and  can  be 
examined.  The  program  can  be  restarted  by  using  CONT  or  GOTO 
statements. 


EXAMPLES  of  STOP  Statement: 

10  INPUT#1 , AA,  BB,  CC 

20  IF  AA  = BB  AND  BB  = CC  THEN  STOP 

30  STOP 


(If  the  variable  AA  is  -1  and  BB  is  equal  to  CC  then:) 
BREAK  IN  LINE  20 

BREAK  IN  LINE  30  (For  any  other  data  values) 

86  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


STR$ 


TYPE:  String  Function 
FORMAT:  STR$  (<numeric>) 


Action  STR$  gives  you  the  STRing  representation  of  the  numeric  value 
of  the  argument.  When  the  STR$  value  is  converted  to  each  variable 
represented  in  the  <numeric>  argument,  any  number  shown  is  fol- 
lowed by  a space  and,  if  it's  positive,  it  is  also  preceded  by  a space. 

EXAMPLE  of  STR$  Function: 

100  FLT  = 1.5E4:  ALPHAS  = STR$(FLT) 

110  PRINT  FLT,  ALPHAS 

15000  15000 


SYS 

TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  SYS  <memory-location> 

Action:  This  is  the  most  common  way  to  mix  a BASIC  program  with  a 
machine  language  program.  The  machine  language  program  begins  at 
the  location  given  in  the  SYS  statement.  The  system  command  SYS  is 
used  in  either  direct  or  program  mode  to  transfer  control  of  the  micro- 
processor to  an  existing  machine  language  program  in  memory.  The 
memory-location  given  is  by  numeric  expression  and  can  be  anywhere  in 
memory,  RAM  or  ROM. 

When  you're  using  the  SYS  statement  you  must  end  that  section  of 
machine  language  code  with  an  RTS  (ReTurn  from  Subroutine)  instruction 
so  that  when  the  machine  language  program  is  finished,  the  BASIC 
execution  will  resume  with  the  statement  following  the  SYS  command. 

EXAMPLES  of  SYS  Statement: 

SYS  64738  (Jump  to  System  Cold  Start  in  ROM) 

10  POKE  4400,96:  SYS  4400  (Goes  to  machine  code  location  4400 

and  returns  immediately) 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  87 


TAB 


TYPE:  Special  Function 
FORMAT:  TAB  (<numeric>) 


Action  The  TAB  function  moves  the  cursor  to  a relative  SPC  move 
position  on  the  screen  given  by  the  <numeric>  argument,  starting  with 
the  left-most  position  of  the  current  line.  The  value  of  the  argument  can 
range  from  0 to  255.  The  TAB  function  should  only  be  used  with  the 
PRINT  statement,  since  it  has  no  effect  if  used  with  PRINT#  to  a logical 
file. 

EXAMPLE  of  TAB  Function: 

100  PRINT  "NAME"  TAB(25)  "AMOUNT":  PRINT 
110  INPUT#1,  NAM$,  AMT$ 

120  PRINT  NAM$  TAB(25)  AMT$ 

NAME  AMOUNT 

G.T.  JONES  25. 

TAN 

TYPE:  Floating-Point  Function 
FORMAT:  TAN  (<numeric>) 

Action:  Returns  the  tangent  of  the  value  of  the  <numeric>  expression 
in  radians.  If  the  TAN  function  overflows,  the  BASIC  error  message  701- 
VISION  BY  ZERO  is  displayed. 

EXAMPLE  of  TAN  Function: 

10  XX  = .785398163:  YY  = TAN(XX):  PRINT  YY 
1 


88  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


TIME 


TYPE:  Numeric  Function 
FORMAT:  Tl 

Action  The  Tl  function  reads  the  interval  Tinner.  This  type  of  "clock"  is 
called  a "jiffy  clock."  The  "jiffy  clock"  value  is  set  at  zero  (initialized) 
when  you  power-up  the  system.  This  1/60  second  interval  timer  is  turned 
off  during  tape  I/O. 

EXAMPLE  of  Tl  Function: 

10  PRINT  TI/60  "SECONDS  SINCE  POWER  UP" 


TIME$ 


TYPE:  String  Function 
FORMAT:  Tl$ 

Action  The  Tl$  timer  looks  and  works  like  a real  clock  as  long  as  your 
system  is  powered-on.  The  hardware  interval  timer  (or  jiffy  clock)  is  read 
and  used  to  update  the  value  of  Tl$,  which  will  give  you  a Time  $tring  of 
six  characters  in  hours,  minutes  and  seconds.  The  Tl$  timer  can  also  be 
assigned  an  arbitrary  starting  point  similar  to  the  way  you  set  your 
wristwatch.  The  value  of  Tl$  is  not  accurate  after  tape  I/O. 

EXAMPLE  of  Tl$  Function: 

1 Tl$  = "000000":  FOR  J = 1 TO  10000:  NEXT:  PRINT  Tl$ 

000011 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  89 


USR 


TYPE:  Floating-Point  Function 
FORMAT:  USR  (<numeric>) 

Action:  The  USR  function  jumps  to  a User  callable  machine  language 
SubRoutine  which  has  its  starting  address  pointed  to  by  the  contents  of 
memory  locations  785-786.  The  starting  address  is  established  before 
calling  the  USR  function  by  using  POKE  statements  to  set  up  locations 
785-786.  Unless  POKE  statements  are  used,  locations  785-786  will  give 
you  an  ?ILLEGAL  QUANTITY  error  message. 

The  value  of  the  <numeric>  argument  is  stored  in  the  floating-point 
accumulator  starting  at  location  97,  for  access  by  the  Assembler  code 
and  the  result  of  the  USR  function  is  the  value  which  ends  up  there  when 
the  subroutine  returns  to  BASIC. 

EXAMPLES  of  USR  Function: 

10  B = T * SIN(Y) 

20  C = USR  (B/2) 

30  D = USR  (B/3) 


VAL 


TYPE:  Numeric  Function 
FORMAT:  VAL  (<string>) 


Action:  Returns  a numeric  VALue  representing  the  data  in  the 
<string>  argument.  If  the  first  non-blank  character  of  the  string  is  not  a 
P us  sign  (+),  minus  sign  (-),  or  a digit  the  VALue  returned  is  zero 
Stnng  conversion  is  finished  when  the  end  of  the  string  or  any  non-diqit 
c aracter  is  found  (except  decimal  point  or  exponential  e). 


EXAMPLE  of  VAL  Function: 

10  INPUT#1,  NAM$,  ZIP$ 

20  IF  VAL(ZIP$)  < 19400  OR  VAL(ZIP$)  > 96699 

THEN  PRINT  NAM$  TAB(25)  "GREATER  PHILADELPHIA" 


90  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


VERIFY 


TYPE:  Command 

FORMAT:  VERIFY  ["<file-name>"]  [,<device>] 


Action  The  VERIFY  command  is  used,  in  direct  or  program  mode,  to 
compare  the  contents  of  a BASIC  program  file  on  tape  or  disk  with  the 
program  currently  in  memory.  VERIFY  is  normally  used  right  after  a 
SAVE,  to  make  sure  that  the  program  was  stored  correctly  on  tape  or 
disk. 

If  the  <device>  number  is  left  out,  the  program  is  assumed  to  be  on 
the  Datassette™  which  is  device  number  1.  For  tape  files,  if  the  <file- 
name>  is  left  out,  the  next  program  found  on  the  tape  will  be  com- 
pared. For  disk  files  (device  number  8),  the  file-name  must  be  present.  If 
any  differences  in  program  text  are  found,  the  BASIC  error  message 
?VERIFY  ERROR  is  displayed. 

A program  name  can  be  given  either  in  quotes  ("  ")  or  as  a string 
variable.  VERIFY  is  also  used  to  position  a tape  just  past  the  last  pro- 
gram, so  that  a new  program  can  be  added  to  the  tape  without  acci- 
dentally writing  over  another  program. 


EXAMPLES  of  VERIFY  Command: 

VERIFY  (Checks  1st  program  on  tape) 

PRESS  PLAY  ON  TAPE 
OK 

SEARCHING 
FOUND  <FILENAME> 

VERIFYING 

9000  SAVE  "ME",8: 

9010  VERIFY  "ME", 8 (Looks  at  device  8 for  the  program) 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  91 


WAIT 


TYPE:  Statement 

FORMAT:  WAIT  <location>,  <mask-l>  [,<mask-2>] 


Action:  The  WAIT  statement  causes  program  execution  to  be  sus- 
pended until  a given  memory  address  recognizes  a specified  bit  pattern. 
In  other  words  WAIT  can  be  used  to  halt  the  program  until  some  external 
event  has  occurred.  This  is  done  by  monitoring  the  status  of  bits  in  the 
input/output  registers.  The  data  items  used  with  WAIT  can  be  any 
numeric  expressions,  but  they  will  be  converted  to  integer  values. 

For  most  programmers,  this  statement  should  never  be  used.  It  causes 
the  program  to  halt  until  a specific  memory  location's  bits  change  in  a 
specific  way.  This  is  used  for  certain  I/O  operations  and  almost  nothing 


The  WAIT  statement  takes  the  value  in  the  memory  location  and  per- 
forms a logical  AND  operation  with  the  value  in  mask-1.  If  there  is  a 
mask-2  in  the  statement,  the  result  of  the  first  operation  is  exclusive- 
ORed  with  mask-2.  In  other  words  mask-1  "filters  out"  any  bits  that  you 
don  t want  to  test.  Where  the  bit  is  0 in  mask-1 , the  corresponding  bit  in 
the  result  will  always  be  0.  The  mask-2  value  flips  any  bits,  so  that  you 
can  test  for  an  off  condition  as  well  as  an  on  condition.  Any  bits  being 
tested  for  a 0 should  have  a 1 in  the  corresponding  position  in  mask-2 
!f  corresponding  bits  of  the  <mask-l>  and  <mask-2>  operands  differ, 
the  exclusive-OR  operation  gives  a bit  result  of  1 . If  corresponding  bits  get 

:Ah:,re  result  the  bit  is  °-  lf  is  possible  to  enter  an  infinite  pause  with  the 
WAIT  statement,  in  which  case  the  QSJQQJ  and  ffRUNJ  ke  s 

CQn  ^ reC°Ver-  H°ld  d°Wn  the  l«7and  then 

press  • The  first  example  below  WAITs  until  a key  is  pressed  on 

e tape  unit  to  continue  with  the  program.  The  second  example  will  WAIT 
until  a sprite  collides  with  the  screen  background. 


EXAMPLES  of  WAIT  Statement: 

WAIT  1,  32,  32 

WAIT  53273,  6,  6 

WAIT  36868,  144,  16  (144  & 16  are  masks.  144=10010000  in 

binary  and  16=10000  in  binary.  The 
WAIT  statement  will  halt  the  pro- 
gram until  the  128  bit  is  on  or 
until  the  16  bit  is  off) 

*2  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


THE  COMMODORE  64  KEYBOARD 
AND  FEATURES 


The  Operating  System  has  a ten-character  keyboard  ''buffer"  that  is 
used  to  hold  incoming  keystrokes  until  they  can  be  processed.  This  buf- 
fer, or  queue,  holds  keystrokes  in  the  order  in  which  they  occur  so  that 
the  first  one  put  into  the  queue  is  the  first  one  processed.  For  example,  if 
a second  keystroke  occurs  before  the  first  can  be  processed,  the  second 
character  is  stored  in  the  buffer,  while  processing  of  the  first  character 
continues.  After  the  program  has  finished  with  the  first  character,  the 
keyboard  buffer  is  examined  for  more  data,  and  the  second  keystroke 
processed.  Without  this  buffer,  rapid  keyboard  input  would  occasionally 
drop  characters. 

In  other  words,  the  keyboard  buffer  allows  you  to  "type-ahead"  of 
the  system,  which  means  it  can  anticipate  responses  to  INPUT  prompts 
or  GET  statements.  As  you  type  on  the  keys  their  character  values  are 
lined  up,  single-file  (queued)  into  the  buffer  to  wait  for  processing  in  the 
order  the  keys  were  struck.  This  type-ahead  feature  can  give  you  an 
occasional  problem  where  an  accidental  keystroke  causes  a program  to 
fetch  an  incorrect  character  from  the  buffer. 

Normally,  incorrect  keystrokes  present  no  problem,  since  they  can  be 
corrected  by  the  CuRSoR-Left  or  DELete  keys 

and  then  retyping  the  character,  and  the  corrections  will  be  processed 
before  a following  carriage-return.  However,  if  you  press  the  | 
key,  no  corrective  action  is  possible,  since  all  characters  in  the  buffer  up 
to  and  including  the  carriage-return  will  be  processed  before  any  cor- 
rections. This  situation  can  be  avoided  by  using  a loop  to  empty  the 
keyboard  buffer  before  reading  an  intended  response: 


10  GET  JUNK$:  IF  JUNK$  <>""  THEN  10:  REM  EMPTY  THE 
KEYBOARD  BUFFER 


In  addition  to  GET  and  INPUT,  the  keyboard  can  also  be  read  using 
PEEK  to  fetch  from  memory  location  197  ($00C5)  the  integer  value  of  the 
key  currently  being  pressed.  If  no  key  is  being  held  when  the  PEEK  is 
executed,  a value  of  64  is  returned.  The  numeric  keyboard  values, 
keyboard  symbols  and  character  equivalents  (CHR$)  are  shown  in  Ap- 
pendix C.  The  following  example  loops  until  a key  is  pressed  then  con- 
verts the  integer  to  a character  value. 


10  AA  = PEEK(197):  IF  AA  = 64  THEN  10 
20  BB$  = CHR$(AA) 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY  93 


The  keyboard  is  treated  as  a set  of  switches  organized  into  a matrix 
of  8 columns  by  8 rows.  The  keyboard  matrix  is  scanned  for  key 
switch-closures  by  the  KERNAL  using  the  CIA  #1  I/O  chip  (MOS  6526 
Complex  Interface  Adapter).  Two  CIA  registers  are  used  to  perform  the 
scan:  register  #0  at  location  56320  ($DC00)  for  keyboard  columns  and 
register  #1  at  location  56321  ($DC01)  for  keyboard  rows. 

Bits  0—7  of  memory  location  56320  correspond  to  the  columns  0—7. 
Bits  0-7  of  memory  location  56321  correspond  to  rows  0-7.  By  writing 
column  values  in  sequence,  then  reading  row  values,  the  KERNAL  de- 
codes the  switch  closures  into  the  CHR$  (N)  value  of  the  key  pressed. 

Eight  columns  by  eight  rows  yields  64  possible  values.  However,  if  you 
*rst  strike  the  QQ| , | or  Q keys  or  hold  down 

the  key  and  type  a second  character,  additional  values  are 

generated.  This  is  because  the  KERNAL  decodes  these  keys  separately 
and  "remembers"  when  one  of  the  control  keys  was  pressed.  The  result 
of  the  keyboard  scan  is  then  placed  in  location  197. 

Characters  can  also  be  written  directly  to  the  keyboard  buffer  at  lo- 
cations 631-640  using  a POKE  statement.  These  characters  will  be 
processed  when  the  POKE  is  used  to  set  a character  count  into  location 
198.  These  facts  can  be  used  to  cause  a series  of  direct-mode  com- 
mands to  be  executed  automatically  by  printing  the  statements  onto  the 
screen,  putting  carriage-returns  into  the  buffer,  and  then  setting  the 
character  count.  In  the  example  below,  the  program  will  LIST  itself  to 
the  printer  and  then  resume  execution. 


10  PRINT  CHR$(147)"PRINT#1:  CLOSE  1:  GOTO  50" 

20  POKE  631,19:  POKE  632,13:  POKE  633,13:  POKE  198,3 
30  OPEN  1,4:  CMD1:  LIST 
40  END 

50  REM  PROGRAM  RE-STARTS  HERE 

SCREEN  EDITOR 


The  SCREEN  EDITOR  provides  you  with  powerful  and  convenient 
facilities  for  editing  program  text.  Once  a section  of  a program  is  listed 
to  the  screen,  the  cursor  keys  and  other  special  keys  are  used  to  move 
around  the  screen  so  that  you  can  make  any  appropriate  changes.  After 
making  all  the  changes  you  want  to  a specific  line-number  of  text,  hit- 
ting the  key  anywhere  on  the  line,  causes  the  SCREEN 

EDITOR  to  read  the  entire  80-character  logical  screen  line. 


94 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


The  text  is  then  passed  to  the  Interpreter  to  be  tokenized  and  stored  in 
the  program.  The  edited  line  replaces  the  old  version  of  that  line  in 
memory.  An  additional  copy  of  any  line  of  text  can  be  created  simply  by 
changing  the  line-number  and  pressing 

If  you  use  keyword  abbreviations  which  cause  a program  line  to  ex- 
ceed 80  characters,  the  excess  characters  will  be  lost  when  that  line  is 
edited,  because  the  EDITOR  will  read  only  two  physical  screen  lines.  This 
is  also  why  using  INPUT  for  more  than  a total  of  80  characters  is  not 
possible.  Thus,  for  all  practical  purposes,  the  length  of  a line  of  BASIC 
text  is  limited  to  80  characters  as  displayed  on  the  screen. 

Under  certain  conditions  the  SCREEN  EDITOR  treats  the  cursor  control 
keys  differently  from  their  normal  mode  of  handling.  If  the  CuRSoR  is 
positioned  to  the  right  of  an  odd  number  of  double-quote  marks  (")  the 
EDITOR  operates  in  what  is  known  as  the  QUOTE-MODE. 

In  quote  mode  data  characters  are  entered  normally  but  the  cursor 
controls  no  longer  move  the  CuRSoR,  instead  reversed  characters  are 
displayed  which  actually  stand  for  the  cursor  control  being  entered.  The 
same  is  true  of  the  color  control  keys.  This  allows  you  to  include  cursor 
and  color  controls  inside  string  data  items  in  programs.  You  will  find  that 
this  is  a very  important  and  powerful  feature.  That's  because  when  the 
text  inside  the  quotes  is  printed  to  the  screen  it  performs  the  cursor 
positioning  and  color  control  functions  automatically  as  part  of  the 
string.  An  example  of  using  cursor  controls  in  strings  is: 


You  type  ->  10  PRINT  "A(R)(R)B(L)(L)(L)C(R)(R)D//:REM(R)  = CRSR 

RIGHT,  (L)=CRSR  LEFT 

Computer  prints  — > AC  BD 


The  key  is  the  only  cursor  control  NOT  affected  by  quote 

mode.  Therefore,  if  an  error  is  made  while  keying  in  quote  mode, 
the  key  can't  be  used  to  back  up  and  strike  over  the 

error — even  the  key  produces  a reverse  video  character.  In- 

stead, finish  entering  the  line,  and  then,  after  hitting  the  ^ 
key,  you  can  edit  the  line  normally.  Another  alternative,  if  no  further 
cursor-controls  are  needed  in  the  string,  is  to  press  the 
and  keys  which  will  cancel  QUOTE  MODE.  The  cursor 

control  keys  that  you  can  use  in  strings  are  shown  in  Table  2-2. 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


95 


Table  2-2.  Cursor  Control  Characters  In  QUOTE  MODE 


Control  Key 


CRSR  up 
CRSR  down 
CRSR  left 
CRSR  right 
CLR 
HOME 
INST 


[IT  CRSR 
CRSR  H 
[<=  CRSR 

"^rsT? 

CLR/ 

/HOME 

INST/DEL 


Appearance 


□ 

El 

■I 

H 

□ 

m 

n 


When  you  are  NOT  in  quote  mode,  holding  down  the  key  and 

then  pressing  the  INSerT  [ key  shifts  data  to  the  right  of  the  cur- 

sor to  open  up  space  between  two  characters  for  entering  data  between 
them.  The  Editor  then  begins  operating  in  INSERT  MODE  until  all  of  the 
space  opened  up  is  filled. 

The  cursor  controls  and  color  controls  again  show  as  reversed  char- 

QCterS  inJH™«lJ^0de'  The  °nly  difference  occurs  on  the  DELete  and 
INSerT  key.  The  instead  of  operating  normally  as  in 

the  quote  mode,  now  creates  the  reversed  Q . The  key, 

which  created  a reverse  character  in  quote  mode,  inserts  spaces  nor- 

mally. 

Ths  means  that  a PRINT  statement  can  be  created,  containing  DE- 
Letes,  which  can't  be  done  in  quote  mode.  The  insert  mode  is  cancelled 
by  pressing  the  E8| , EBB!  and  MillUM  , 0r  BIUIWJJ  and 
iima  keys.  Or  you  can  cancel  the  insert  mode  by  filling  all  the 
inserted  spaces.  An  example  of  using  DEL  characters  in  strings  is: 


10  PRINT  "HELLO" 


DEL  ■ INST  I INST  I DEL  I DEL 


P" 


(Keystroke  sequence  shown  above,  appearance  when  listed  below) 
10  PRINT"HELP" 


When  the  example  is  RUN,  the  word  displayed  will  be  HELP,  because 
the  letters  LO  are  deleted  before  the  P is  printed.  The  DELete  character 
in  strings  will  work  with  LIST  as  well  as  PRINT.  You  can  use  this  to  "hide" 
part  or  all  of  a line  of  text  using  this  technique.  However,  trying  to  edit  a 
line  with  these  characters  will  be  difficult  if  not  impossible. 


96  BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


There  are  some  other  characters  that  can  be  printed  for  special  func- 
tions, although  they  are  not  easily  available  from  the  keyboard.  In  order 
to  get  these  into  quotes,  you  must  leave  empty  spaces  for  them  in  the 
line,  press  , and  go  back  to  edit  the  line.  Now  you  hold  down 

the  (ConTRoL)  key  and  type  (ReVerSe-ON)  to  start 

typing  reversed  characters.  Type  the  keys  as  shown  below: 


Key  Function  Key  Entered 

Shifted  RETURN  KEH51  Q 

Switch  to  upper/lower  case  o 

Switch  to  upper/graphics  US  O 


Appearance 


Holding  down  the  key  and  hitting  causes  a 

carriage-return  and  line-feed  on  the  screen  but  does  not  end  the  string. 
This  works  with  LIST  as  well  as  PRINT,  so  editing  will  be  almost  impossi- 
ble if  this  character  is  used.  When  output  is  switched  to  the  printer  via 
the  CMD  statement,  the  reverse  "N"  character  shifts  the  printer  into  its 
upper-lower  case  character  set  and  the  "N"  shifts  the  printer 

into  the  upper-case/graphics  character  set. 

Reverse  video  characters  can  be  included  in  strings  by  holding  down 
the  ConTRoL  key  and  pressing  ReVerSe  §jm§,  causing  a re- 

versed R to  appear  inside  the  quotes.  This  will  make  all  characters  print 
in  reverse  video  (like  a negative  of  a photograph).  To  end  the  reverse 
printing,  press  and  (ReVerSe  OFF)  by  holding 

down  the  key  and  typing  the  key,  which  prints  a 

reverse  R.  Numeric  data  can  be  printed  in  reverse  video  by  first  printing 
a CHR$(18).  Printing  a CHR$(146)  or  a carriage-return  will  cancel  re- 
verse video  output. 


BASIC  LANGUAGE  VOCABULARY 


97 


CHAPTER 


PROGRAMMING 
GRAPHICS 
ON  THE 
COMMODORE  64 

• Graphics  Overview 

• Graphics  Locations 

• Standard  Character  Mode 

• Programmable  Characters 

• Multi-Color  Mode  Graphics 

• Extended  Background  Color  Mode 

• Bit  Mapped  Graphics 

• Multi-Color  Bit  Map  Mode 

• Smooth  Scrolling 

• Sprites 

• Other  Graphics  Features 

• Programming  Sprites — Another 
Look 


99 


GRAPHICS  OVERVIEW 


All  of  the  graphics  abilities  of  the  Commodore  64  come  from  the  6567 
Video  Interface  Chip  (also  known  as  the  VIC-II  chip).  This  chip  gives  a 
variety  of  graphics  modes,  including  a 40  column  by  25  line  text  display, 
a 320  by  200  dot  high  resolution  display,  and  SPRITES,  small  movable 
objects  which  make  writing  games  simple.  And  if  this  weren't  enough, 
many  of  the  graphics  modes  can  be  mixed  on  the  same  screen.  It  is 
possible,  for  example,  to  define  the  top  half  of  the  screen  to  be  in  high 
resolution  mode,  while  the  bottom  half  is  in  text  mode.  And  SPRITES  will 
combine  with  anything!  More  on  sprites  later.  First  the  other  graphics 
modes. 

The  VIC-II  chip  has  the  following  graphics  display  modes: 


A)  CHARACTER  DISPLAY  MODES 

1 ) Standard  Character  Mode 

a)  ROM  characters 

b)  RAM  programmable  characters 

2)  Multi-Color  Character  Mode 

a)  ROM  characters 

b)  RAM  programmable  characters 

3)  Extended  Background  Color  Mode 

a)  ROM  characters 

b)  RAM  programmable  characters 


B)  BIT  MAP  MODES 

1)  Standard  Bit  Map  Mode 

2)  Multi-Color  Bit  Map  Mode 


C)  SPRITES 

1)  Standard  Sprites 

2)  Multi-Color  Sprites 


100  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


GRAPHICS  LOCATIONS 


Some  general  information  first.  There  are  1000  possible  locations  on 
the  Commodore  64  screen.  Normally,  the  screen  starts  at  location  1024 
($0400  in  HEXadecimal  notation)  and  goes  to  location  2023.  Each  of 
these  locations  is  8 bits  wide.  This  means  that  it  can  hold  any  integer 
number  from  0 to  255.  Connected  with  screen  memory  is  a group  of 
1000  locations  called  COLOR  MEMORY  or  COLOR  RAM.  These  start  at 
location  55296  ($D800  in  HEX)  and  go  up  to  56295.  Each  of  the  color 
RAM  locations  is  4 bits  wide,  which  means  that  it  can  hold  any  integer 
number  from  0 to  15.  Since  there  are  16  possible  colors  that  the  Com- 
modore 64  can  use,  this  works  out  well. 

In  addition,  there  are  256  different  characters  that  can  be  displayed 
at  any  time.  For  normal  screen  display,  each  of  the  1000  locations  in 
screen  memory  contains  a code  number  which  tells  the  VIC-II  chip  which 
character  to  display  at  that  screen  location. 

The  various  graphics  modes  are  selected  by  the  47  CONTROL  regis- 
ters in  the  VIC-II  chip.  Many  of  the  graphics  functions  can  be  controlled 
by  POKEing  the  correct  value  into  one  of  the  registers.  The  VIC-II  chip  is 
located  starting  at  53248  ($D000  in  HEX)  through  53294  ($D02E  in  HEX). 

VIDEO  BANK  SELECTION 

The  VIC-II  chip  can  access  {"see")  16K  of  memory  at  a time.  Since 
there  is  64K  of  memory  in  the  Commodore  64,  you  want  to  be  able  to 
have  the  VIC-II  chip  see  all  of  it.  There  is  a way.  There  are  4 possible 
BANKS  (or  sections)  of  16K  of  memory.  All  that  is  needed  is  some  means 
of  controlling  which  16K  bank  the  VIC-II  chip  looks  at.  In  that  way,  the 
chip  can  "see"  the  entire  64K  of  memory.  The  BANK  SELECT  bits  that 
allow  you  access  to  all  the  different  sections  of  memory  are  located  in 
the  6526  COMPLEX  INTERFACE  ADAPTER  CHIP  #2  (CIA  #2).  The  POKE 
and  PEEK  BASIC  statements  (or  their  machine  language  versions)  are 
used  to  select  a bank  by  controlling  bits  0 and  1 of  PORT  A of  CIA#2 
(location  56576  (or  $DD00  HEX)).  These  2 bits  must  be  set  to  outputs  by 
setting  bits  0 and  1 of  location  56578  ($DD02,HEX)  to  change  banks.  The 
following  example  shows  this: 

POKE  56578,PEEK(56578)OR  3 :REM  MAKE  SURE  BITS  0 AND  1 ARE 

SET  TO  OUTPUTS 

POKE  56576,(PEEK(56576)AND  252)OR  A:REM  CHANGE  BANKS 

"A"  should  have  one  of  the  following  values: 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS  101 


VALUE 

OF  A 

BITS 

BANK 

STARTING 

LOCATION 

VIC-II  CHIP  RANGE 

0 

00 

3 

49152 

($C000— $FFFFf 

1 

01 

2 

32768 

($8000— $BFFF) 

2 

10 

1 

16384 

($4000— $7FFFf 

3 

1 1 

0 

0 

($0000— $3FFF)  (DEFAULT  VALUE) 

This  16K  bank  concept  is  part  of  everything  that  the  VIC-II  chip  does. 
You  should  always  be  aware  of  which  bank  the  VIC-II  chip  is  pointing 
at,  since  this  will  affect  where  character  data  patterns  come  from, 
where  the  screen  is,  where  sprites  come  from,  etc.  When  you  turn  on  the 
power  of  your  Commodore  64,  bits  0 and  1 of  location  56576  are  auto- 
matically set  to  BANK  0 ($0000— $3FFF)  for  all  display  information. 


' NOTE:  The  Commodore  64  character  set  is  not  available  to  the  VIC-II  chip  in  BANKS 
1 and  3.  (See  character  memory  section.) 


SCREEN  MEMORY 


The  location  of  screen  memory  can  be  changed  easily  by  a POKE  to 
control  register  53272  ($ DO  1 8 HEX).  However,  this  register  is  also  used 
to  control  which  character  set  is  used,  so  be  careful  to  avoid  disturbing 
that  part  of  the  control  register.  The  UPPER  4 bits  control  the  location  of 
screen  memory.  To  move  the  screen,  the  following  statement  should  be 
used: 


POKE53272,(PEEK(53272)AND15)ORA 


102 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


Where  "A"  has  one  of  the  following  values: 


A 

BITS 

LOCATION* 

DECIMAL 

HEX 

0 

OOOOXXXX 

0 

$0000 

16 

0001XXXX 

1024 

$0400  (DEFAULT) 

32 

0010XXXX 

2048 

$0800 

48 

0011XXXX 

3072 

$0C00 

64 

0100XXXX 

4096 

$1000 

80 

0101XXXX 

5120 

$1400 

96 

0110XXXX 

6144 

$1800 

112 

0111XXXX 

7168 

$1C00 

128 

1 oooxxxx 

8192 

$2000 

144 

1001XXXX 

9216 

$2400 

160 

1010XXXX 

10240 

$2800 

176 

1011XXXX 

11264 

$2C00 

192 

1 1 ooxxxx 

12288 

$3000 

208 

1101XXXX 

13312 

$3400 

224 

1110XXXX 

14336 

$3800 

240 

1111XXXX 

15360 

$3C00 

*Remember that  the  BANK  ADDRESS  of  the  VIC-II  chip  must  be  added  in. 

You  must  also  tell  the  KERNAL'S  screen  editor  where  the  screen  is  as  follows:  POKE 
648,  page  (where  page  = address/256,  e.g.,  1024/256=  4,  so  POKE  648,4). 


COLOR  MEMORY 


Color  memory  can  NOT  move.  It  is  always  located  at  locations  55296 
($D800)  through  56295  ($DBE7).  Screen  memory  (the  1000  locations 
starting  at  1024)  and  color  memory  are  used  differently  in  the  different 
graphics  modes.  A picture  created  in  one  mode  will  often  look  com- 
pletely different  when  displayed  in  another  graphics  mode. 

CHARACTER  MEMORY 


Exactly  where  the  VIC-II  gets  it  character  information  is  important  to 
graphic  programming.  Normally,  the  chip  gets  the  shapes  of  the  char- 
acters you  want  to  be  displayed  from  the  CHARACTER  GENERATOR 
ROM.  In  this  chip  are  stored  the  patterns  which  make  up  the  various 
letters,  numbers,  punctuation  symbols,  and  the  other  things  that  you  see 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


103 


on  the  keyboard.  One  of  the  features  of  the  Commodore  64  is  the  ability 
to  use  patterns  located  in  RAM  memory.  These  RAM  patterns  are 
created  by  you,  and  that  means  that  you  can  have  an  almost  infinite  set 
of  symbols  for  games,  business  applications,  etc. 

A normal  character  set  contains  256  characters  in  which  each  char- 
acter is  defined  by  8 bytes  of  data.  Since  each  character  takes  up  8 
bytes  this  means  that  a full  character  set  is  256*8  = 2K  bytes  of  memory. 
Since  the  VIC-II  chip  looks  at  16K  of  memory  at  a time,  there  are  8 
possible  locations  for  a complete  character  set.  Naturally,  you  are  free 
to  use  less  than  a full  character  set.  However,  it  must  still  start  at  one  of 
the  8 possible  starting  locations. 

The  location  of  character  memory  is  controlled  by  3 bits  of  the  VIC-II 
control  register  located  at  53272  ($ DO  1 8 in  HEX  notation).  Bits  3,2,  and 
1 control  where  the  characters7  set  is  located  in  2K  blocks.  Bit  0 is  ig- 
nored. Remember  that  this  is  the  same  register  that  determines  where 
screen  memory  is  located  so  avoid  disturbing  the  screen  memory  bits.  To 
change  the  location  of  character  memory,  the  following  BASIC  state- 
ment can  be  used: 

POKE  53272,(PEEK(53272)AND240)OR  A 


Where  A is  one  of  the  following  values: 


VALUE 

BITS 

LOCATION  OF  CHARACTER  MEMORY* 

of  A 

DECIMAL 

HEX 

0 

XXXXOOOX 

0 

$0000— $07FF 

2 

XXXX001X 

2048 

$0800— $0FFF 

4 

XXXX010X 

4096 

$1000— $17FF  ROM  IMAGE  in  BANK 

0 & 2 (default) 

6 

XXXX011X 

6144 

$ 1 800 — $ 1 FFF  ROM  IMAGE  in  BANK 

0 & 2 

8 

XXXX100X 

8192 

$2000— $27FF 

10 

XXXX101X 

10240 

$2800-$2FFF 

12 

XXXX110X 

12288 

$3000— $37FF 

14 

XXXX111X 

14336 

$3800— $3FFF 

Remember  to  add  in  the  BANK  address. 


104 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


The  ROM  IMAGE  in  the  above  table  refers  to  the  character  generator 
ROM.  It  appears  in  place  of  RAM  at  the  above  locations  in  bank  0.  It 
also  appears  in  the  corresponding  RAM  at  locations  36864-40959 
($9000— $9FFF)  in  bank  2.  Since  the  VIC-II  chip  can  only  access  16K  of 
memory  at  a time,  the  ROM  character  patterns  appear  in  the  16K  block 
of  memory  the  VIC-II  chip  looks  at.  Therefore,  the  system  was  designed 
to  make  the  VIC-II  chip  think  that  the  ROM  characters  are  at  4096-8191 
($  1 000  — $ 1 FFF)  when  your  data  is  in  bank  0,  and  36864-40959 
($9000— $9FFF)  when  your  data  is  in  bank  2,  even  though  the  character 
ROM  is  actually  at  location  53248-57343  ($D000-$DFFF).  This  imaging 
only  applies  to  character  data  as  seen  by  the  VIC-II  chip.  It  can  be  used 
for  programs,  other  data,  etc.,  just  like  any  other  RAM  memory. 

NOTE:  ,f  fhese  rom  images  get  in  the  way  of  your  own  graphics,  then  set  the  BANK 
SELECT  BITS  to  one  of  the  BANKS  without  the  images  (BANKS  1 or  3).  The  ROM 
patterns  won't  be  there. 


The  location  and  contents  of  the  character  set  in  ROM  are  as  follows: 


BLOCK 

ADDRESS 

VIC-II 

CONTENTS 

DECIMAL 

FTEX 

IMAGE 

0 

53248 

D000— D1  FF 

1000-1  IFF 

Upper  case  characters 

53760 

D200-D3FF 

1200-13FF 

Graphics  characters 

54272 

D400-D5FF 

1400-15FF 

Reversed  upper  case 
characters 

54784 

D600-D7FF 

1600-17FF 

Reversed  graphics 
characters 

1 

55296 

D800-D9FF 

1800-19FF 

Lower  case  characters 

55808 

DA00-DBFF 

1A00-1BFF 

Upper  case  & graphics 
characters 

56320 

DC00-DDFF 

1C00-1DFF 

Reversed  lower  case 
characters 

56832 

DE00-DFFF 

1E00-1FFF 

Reversed  upper  case  & 
graphics  characters 

Sharp-eyed  readers  will  have  just  noticed  something.  The  locations 
occupied  by  the  character  ROM  are  the  same  as  the  ones  occupied  by 
the  VIC-II  chip  control  registers.  This  is  possible  because  they  don't  oc- 
cupy the  same  locations  at  the  same  time.  When  the  VIC-II  chip  needs  to 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


105 


access  character  data  the  ROM  is  switched  in.  It  becomes  an  image  in 
the  16K  bank  of  memory  that  the  VIC-II  chip  is  looking  at.  Otherwise, 
the  area  is  occupied  by  the  I/O  control  registers,  and  the  character  ROM 
is  only  available  to  the  VIC-II  chip. 

However,  you  may  need  to  get  to  the  character  ROM  if  you  are  going 
to  use  programmable  characters  and  want  to  copy  some  of  the  char- 
acter ROM  for  some  of  your  character  definitions.  In  this  case  you  must 
switch  out  the  I/O  register,  switch  in  the  character  ROM,  and  do  your 
copying.  When  you're  finished,  you  must  switch  the  I/O  registers  back  in 
again.  During  the  copying  process  (when  I/O  is  switched  out)  no  inter- 
rupts can  be  allowed  to  take  place.  This  is  because  the  I/O  registers  are 
needed  to  service  the  interrupts.  If  you  forget  and  perform  an  interrupt, 
really  strange  things  happen.  The  keyboard  should  not  be  read  during 
the  copying  process.  To  turn  off  the  keyboard  and  other  normal  inter- 
rupts that  occur  with  your  Commodore  64,  the  following  POKE  should  be 
used: 


POKE  56334, PEE K(56334)AN D254  (TURNS  INTERRUPTS  OFF) 


After  you  are  finished  getting  characters  from  the  character  ROM, 
and  are  ready  to  continue  with  your  program,  you  must  turn  the 
keyboard  scan  back  on  by  the  following  POKE: 

POKE  56334, PEEK(56334)ORl  (TURNS  INTERRUPTS  ON) 


The  following  POKE  will  switch  out  I/O  and  switch  the  CHARACTER 
ROM  in: 

POKE  1,PEEK(1)AND251 


The  character  ROM  is  now  in  the  locations  from  53248-57343  ($D000- 
$DFFF). 

To  switch  I/O  back  into  $D000  for  normal  operation  use  the  following 
POKE: 


POKE  l,PEEK(l)OR  4 


106  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


STANDARD  CHARACTER  MODE 


Standard  character  mode  is  the  mode  the  Commodore  64  is  in  when 
you  first  turn  it  on.  It  is  the  mode  you  will  generally  program  in. 

Characters  can  be  taken  from  ROM  or  from  RAM,  but  normally  they 
are  taken  from  ROM.  When  you  want  special  graphics  characters  for  a 
program,  all  you  have  to  do  is  define  the  new  character  shapes  in  RAM, 
and  tell  the  VIC-II  chip  to  get  its  character  information  from  there  in- 
stead of  the  character  ROM.  This  is  covered  in  more  detail  in  the  next 
section. 

In  order  to  display  characters  on  the  screen  in  color,  the  VIC-II  chip 
accesses  the  screen  memory  to  determine  the  character  code  for  that 
location  on  the  screen.  At  the  same  time,  it  accesses  the  color  memory 
to  determine  what  color  you  want  for  the  character  displayed.  The 
character  code  is  translated  by  the  VIC-II  into  the  starting  address  of  the 
8-byte  block  holding  your  character  pattern.  The  8-byte  block  is  located 
in  character  memory. 

The  translation  isn't  too  complicated,  but  a number  of  items  are  com- 
bined to  generate  the  desired  address.  First  the  character  code  you  use 
to  POKE  screen  memory  is  multiplied  by  8.  Next  add  the  start  of  char- 
acter memory  (see  CHARACTER  MEMORY  section).  Then  the  Bank  Select 
Bits  are  taken  into  account  by  adding  in  the  base  address  (see  VIDEO 
BANK  SELECTION  section).  Below  is  a simple  formula  to  illustrate  what 
happens: 

CHARACTER  ADDRESS  = SCREEN  C O D E * 8 + ( C H A R AC T E R 
SET*2048)+(BANK*  16384) 

CHARACTER  DEFINITIONS 


Each  character  is  formed  in  an  8 by  8 grid  of  dots,  where  each  dot 
may  be  either  on  or  off.  The  Commodore  64  character  images  are 
stored  in  the  Character  Generator  ROM  chip.  The  characters  are  stored 
as  a set  of  8 bytes  for  each  character,  with  each  byte  representing  the 
dot  pattern  of  a row  in  the  character,  and  each  bit  representing  a dot. 
A zero  bit  means  that  dot  is  off,  and  a one  bit  means  the  dot  is  on. 

The  character  memory  in  ROM  begins  at  location  53248  (when  the  I/O 
is  switched  off).  The  first  8 bytes  from  location  53248  ($D000)  to  53255 
($D007)  contain  the  pattern  for  the  @ sign,  which  has  a character  code 
value  of  zero  in  the  screen  memory.  The  next  8 bytes,  from  location 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


107 


53256  ($D008)  to  53263  ($D00F),  contain  the  information  for  forming  the 
letter  A. 


IMAGE 

BINARY 

PEEK 

** 

00011000 

24 

* * * * 

001 11100 

60 

** 

** 

01100110 

102 

****** 

01111110 

126 

** 

** 

01100110 

102 

** 

** 

01100110 

102 

** 

** 

01100110 

102 

00000000 

0 

Each  complete  character  set  takes  up  2K  (2048  bits)  of  memory,  8 
bytes  per  character  and  256  characters.  Since  there  are  two  character 
sets,  one  for  upper  case  and  graphics  and  the  other  with  upper  and 
lower  case,  the  character  generator  ROM  takes  up  a total  of  4K  loca- 
tions. 


PROGRAMMABLE  CHARACTERS 


Since  the  characters  are  stored  in  ROM,  it  would  seem  that  there  is  no 
way  to  change  them  for  customizing  characters.  However,  the  memory 
location  that  tells  the  VIC-II  chip  where  to  find  the  characters  is  a pro- 
grammable register  which  can  be  changed  to  point  to  many  sections  of 
memory.  By  changing  the  character  memory  pointer  to  point  to  RAM, 
the  character  set  may  be  programmed  for  any  need. 

If  you  want  your  character  set  to  be  located  in  RAM,  there  are  a few 
VERY  IMPORTANT  things  to  take  into  account  when  you  decide  to  actu- 
ally program  your  own  character  sets.  In  addition,  there  are  two  other 
important  points  you  must  know  to  create  your  own  special  characters: 

1)  It  is  an  all  or  nothing  process.  Generally,  if  you  use  your  own  char- 
acter set  by  telling  the  VIC-II  chip  to  get  the  character  information 
from  the  area  you  have  prepared  in  RAM,  the  standard  Commo- 
dore 64  characters  are  unavailable  to  you.  To  solve  this,  you  must 
copy  any  letters,  numbers,  or  standard  Commodore  64  graphics 
you  intend  to  use  into  your  own  character  memory  in  RAM.  You  can 
pick  and  choose,  take  only  the  ones  you  want,  and  don't  even 
have  to  keep  them  in  order! 


108 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


2)  Your  character  set  takes  memory  space  away  from  your  BASIC 
program.  Of  course,  with  38K  available  for  a BASIC  program, 
most  applications  won't  have  problems. 


WARNING:  You  must  be  careful  to  protect  the  character  set  from  being  overwritten 
by  your  BASIC  program,  which  also  uses  the  RAM. 


There  are  two  locations  in  the  Commodore  64  to  start  your  character 
set  that  should  NOT  be  used  with  BASIC:  location  0 and  location 
2048.  The  first  should  not  be  used  because  the  system  stores  important 
data  on  page  0.  The  second  can't  be  used  because  that  is  where  your 
BASIC  program  starts!  However,  there  are  6 other  starting  positions  for 
your  custom  character  set. 

The  best  place  to  put  your  character  set  for  use  with  BASIC  while 
experimenting  is  beginning  at  12288  ($3000  in  HEX).  This  is  done  by 
POKEing  the  low  4 bits  of  location  53272  with  12.  Try  the  POKE  now,  like 
this: 


POKE  53272,(PEEK(53272)AND240)+ 1 2 

Immediately,  all  the  letters  on  the  screen  turn  to  garbage,  This  is 
because  there  are  no  characters  set  up  at  location  12288  right  now  . . . 
only  random  bytes.  Set  the  Commodore  64  back  to  normal  by  hitting 
the  key  and  then  the  key. 

Now  let's  begin  creating  graphics  characters.  To  protect  your  char- 
acter set  from  BASIC,  you  should  reduce  the  amount  of  memory  BASIC 
thinks  it  has.  The  amount  of  memory  in  your  computer  stays  the 
same.  . . it's  just  that  you've  told  BASIC  not  to  use  some  of  it.  Type: 


PRINT  FRE(0)— (SGN(FRE(0))<0)*65535 


The  number  displayed  is  the  amount  of  memory  space  left  unused.  Now 
type  the  following: 


POKE  52,48: POKE56,48:CLR 


Now  type: 

PRINT  FRE(0)-(SGN(FRE(0))<0)*65535 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS  109 


See  the  change?  BASIC  now  thinks  it  has  less  memory  to  work  with.  The 
memory  you  just  claimed  from  BASIC  is  where  you  are  going  to  put  your 
character  set,  safe  from  actions  of  BASIC. 

The  next  step  is  to  put  your  characters  into  RAM.  When  you  begin, 
there  is  random  data  beginning  at  12288  ($3000  HEX).  You  must  put 
character  patterns  in  RAM  (in  the  same  style  as  the  ones  in  ROM)  for  the 
VIC-II  chip  to  use. 

The  following  program  moves  64  characters  from  ROM  to  your  char- 
acter set  RAM: 

5 PRINTCHR$<142>  : REM  SWITCH  TO 

UPPER  CASE 

1 0 POKES 2 , 48 : P0KE56 , 48 : CLR  : REM  RESERVE  MEMORY 
FOR  CHARACTERS 

20  PGKE56334, PEEK < 56334 >AND254  : REM  TURN  OFF 
KEVSCAN  INTERRUPT  TIMER 

30  POKE  1 ..  PEEK < 1 RND25 1 : REM  SWITCH  IN 

CHARACTER 

40  FOR  I -OT 051 1 : POKE  I + 1 2288 ..  PEEK <1 +53248 > : NEXT 
50  POKE  1 .-  PEEK 1 > OR 4 : REM  SWITCH  IN  I/O 

SB  POKE 5 8334 , PEEK < 56334  > OR 1 : REM  RESTART 

KEVSCAN  INTERRUPT  TIMER 
70  END 

Now  POKE  location  53272  with  (PEEK(53272)AND240)+ 1 2.  Nothing 
happens,  right?  Well,  almost  nothing.  The  Commodore  64  is  now  getting 
it's  character  information  from  your  RAM,  instead  of  from  ROM.  But 
since  we  copied  the  characters  from  ROM  exactly,  no  difference  can  be 
seen.  . . . yet. 

You  can  easily  change  the  characters  now.  Clear  the  screen  and  type 
an  @ sign.  Move  the  cursor  down  a couple  of  lines,  then  type: 

FOR  I = 12288  TO  12288  + 7:POKE  I,  255  - PEEK(I)  : NEXT 

You  just  created  a reversed  @ sign! 


TIP:  Reversed  characters  are  just  characters  with  their  bit  patterns  in  character  memory 
reversed. 


Now  move  the  cursor  up  to  the  program  again  and  hit 
again  to  re-reverse  the  character  (bring  it  back  to  normal).  By  looking  at 
the  table  of  screen  display  codes,  you  can  figure  out  where  in  RAM  each 
character  is.  Just  remember  that  each  character  takes  eight  memory 
locations  to  store.  Here's  a few  examples  just  to  get  you  started: 


110 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


CHARACTER 

DISPLAY  CODE 

CURRENT  STARTING  LOCATION  IN  RAM 

@ 

0 

12288 

A 

1 

12296 

! 

33 

12552 

> 

62 

12784 

Remember  that  we  only  took  the  first  64  characters.  Something  else 
will  have  to  be  done  if  you  want  one  of  the  other  characters. 

What  if  you  wanted  character  number  154,  a reversed  Z?  Well,  you 
could  make  it  yourself,  by  reversing  a Z,  or  you  could  copy  the  set  of 
reversed  characters  from  the  ROM,  or  just  take  the  one  character  you 
want  from  ROM  and  replace  one  of  the  characters  you  have  in  RAM  that 
you  don't  need. 

Suppose  you  decide  that  you  won't  need  the  > sign.  Let's  replace  the 
> sign  with  the  reversed  Z.  Type  this: 

FOR  1=0  TO  7:  POKE  12784  + I,  255- PEEK(I  + 12496):  NEXT 


Now  type  a > sign.  It  comes  up  as  a reversed  Z.  No  matter  how 
many  times  you  type  the  >,  it  comes  out  as  a reversed  Z.  (This  change 
is  really  an  illusion.  Though  the  > sign  looks  like  a reversed  Z,  it  still  acts 
like  a > in  a program.  Try  something  that  needs  a > sign.  It  will  still 
work  fine,  only  it  will  look  strange.) 

A quick  review:  You  can  now  copy  characters  from  ROM  into  RAM. 
You  can  even  pick  and  choose  only  the  ones  you  want.  There's  only  one 
step  left  in  programmable  characters  (the  best  step!)  . . . making  your 
own  characters. 

Remember  how  characters  are  stored  in  ROM?  Each  character  is 
stored  as  a group  of  eight  bytes.  The  bit  patterns  of  the  bytes  directly 
control  the  character.  If  you  arrange  8 bytes,  one  on  top  of  another, 
and  write  out  each  byte  as  eight  binary  digits,  it  forms  an  eight  by  eight 
matrix,  looking  like  the  characters.  When  a bit  is  a one,  there  is  a dot  at 
that  location.  When  a bit  is  a zero,  there  is  a space  at  that  location. 

When  creating  your  own  characters,  you  set  up  the  same  kind  of  table 
in  memory.  Type  NEW  and  then  type  this  program: 

10  FOR  I = 12448  TO  12455  : READ  A:  POKE  l,A:  NEXT 
20  DATA  60,  66,  165,  129,  165,  153,  66,  60 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


111 


Now  type  RUN.  The  program  will  replace  the  letter  T with  a smile  face 
character.  Type  a few  T's  to  see  the  face.  Each  of  the  numbers  in  the 
DATA  statement  in  line  20  is  a row  in  the  smile  face  character.  The 
matrix  for  the  face  looks  like  this: 


7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 


ROW  0 
1 
2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

ROW  7 


0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 
7 


* * * * 

* * 

* * * * 

* * 
* * * * 

* * * * 

* * 

* * * * 


BINARY 

DECIMAL 

00111100 

60 

01000010 

66 

10100101 

165 

10000001 

129 

10100101 

165 

10011001 

153 

01000010 

66 

00111100 

60 

2 1 

0 

Figure  3-1.  Programmable  Character  Worksheet. 


112  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


The  Programmable  Character  Worksheet  (Figure  3-1)  will  help  you 
design  your  own  characters.  There  is  an  8 by  8 matrix  on  the  sheet,  with 
row  numbers,  and  numbers  at  the  top  of  each  column.  (If  you  view  each 
row  as  a binary  word,  the  numbers  are  the  value  of  that  bit  position. 
Each  is  a power  of  2.  The  leftmost  bit  is  equal  to  128  or  2 to  the  7th 
power,  the  next  is  equal  to  64  or  2 to  the  6th,  and  so  on,  until  you  reach 
the  rightmost  bit  (bit  0)  which  is  equal  to  1 or  2 to  the  0 power.) 

Place  an  X on  the  matrix  at  every  location  where  you  want  a dot  to  be 
in  your  character.  When  your  character  is  ready  you  can  create  the 
DATA  statement  for  your  character. 

Begin  with  the  first  row.  Wherever  you  placed  an  X,  take  the  number 
at  the  top  of  the  column  (the  power-of-2  number,  as  explained  above) 
and  write  it  down.  When  you  have  the  numbers  for  every  column  of  the 
first  row,  add  them  together.  Write  this  number  down,  next  to  the  row. 
This  is  the  number  that  you  will  put  into  the  DATA  statement  to  draw  this 
row. 

Do  the  same  thing  with  all  of  the  other  rows  (1—7).  When  you  are 
finished  you  should  have  8 numbers  between  0 and  255.  If  any  of  your 
numbers  are  not  within  range,  recheck  your  addition.  The  numbers  must 
be  in  this  range  to  be  correct!  If  you  have  less  than  8 numbers,  you 
missed  a row.  It's  OK  if  some  are  0.  The  0 rows  are  just  as  important  as 
the  other  numbers. 

Replace  the  numbers  in  the  DATA  statement  in  line  20  with  the  num- 
bers you  just  calculated,  and  RUN  the  program.  Then  type  a T.  Every 
time  you  type  it,  you'll  see  your  own  character! 

If  you  don't  like  the  way  the  character  turned  out,  just  change  the 
numbers  in  the  DATA  statement  and  re-RUN  the  program  until  you  are 
happy  with  your  character. 

That's  all  there  is  to  it! 


HINT:  For  best  results,  always  make  any  vertical  lines  in  your  characters  at  least  2 
dots  (bits)  wide.  This  helps  prevent  CHROMA  noise  (color  distortion)  on  your  char- 
acters when  they  are  displayed  on  a TV  screen. 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


113 


Here  is  an  example  of  a program  using  standard  programmable 
characters: 


1©  REM  * EXAMPLE  1 * 

20  REM  CREATING  PROGRAMMABLE  CHARACTERS 
3 1 PQKE5S334 , PEEK  < 56334  > ANB254  : POKE  1 , PEEK  < 1 > A Nil  2 5 1 : 
REM  TURN  OFF  KB  AND  I/O 

35  FOR I -©TOSS : REM  CHARACTER  RANGE  TO  BE  COPIED 
FROM  ROM 

36  FORJ-0TO7 : REM  CO PV  ALL  8 BYTES  PER  CHARACTER 

37  POKE 12288+ I *8+ J, PEEK C 53248+ I *8+ J> : REM  COPY  A 
BYTE 

33  NEXT J : NEXT I : REM  GOTO  NEXT  BYTE  OR  CHARACTER 
33  POKE  1 PEEK  < 1 ) 0R4  : P0KE5S334  .■  PEEK < 56334 np  1 : REM 
TURN  ON  I/O  AND  KB 

4©  P0KE53272 ..  < PEEK < 53272  > AND240  > + 12  : REM  SET  CHAR 
POINTER  TO  MEM.  12288 

60  FORCHAR=60TO63 : REM  PROGRAM  CHARACTERS  6©  THRU  63 
8©  F0RBYTE«©T07 • REM  DO  ALL  8 BYTES  OF  A CHARACTER* 
100  READ  NUMBER : REM  READ  IN  1/8TH  OF  CHARACTER  BATA 
12©  POKE 1 2288+ <8#CHAR>+BYTE; NUMBER: REM  STARE  THE 
DATA  IN  MEMORY 

140  NEXTBYTE : NEXTCHAR : REM  ALSO  COULD  BE  NEXT  BYTE* 
CHAR 

1 5©  PR I NTCHR*  < 1 47  > TAB < 255 ) CHR$  < 6© > ; 

1 55  PR  I NT  CHR$  >'  6 1 > T FlB  < 55  ) CHR$  < 62  > CHRT  < 63  > 

16U  REM  LINE  150  PUTS  THE  NEWLY  DEFINED  CHARACTERS 
ON  THE  SCREEN  * “ 

170  GETA$:REM  WAIT  FOR  USER  TO  PRESS  A KEY 
lb’U  IFA$="  "THENGOTO170 : REM  IF  NO  KEYS  WERE  PRESSED. 
TRY  AGAIN! 

lyw  P0KE53272.*  21  : REM  RETURN  TO  NORMAL  CHARACTERS 
200  DATA4, 6, 7, 5, 7, 7, 3, 3 : REM  DATA  FOR  CHARACTER  6© 

2 1 0 DATA  32  .*  36 , 224  .*  1 6© , 224  .*  224  .*  1 32  .*  1 32  : REM  DATA 
FOR  CHARACTER  61 

22©  DAT A7  .*7,7 , 3 1 , 3 1 , 35 , 1 43 , 1 27  • REM  DATA  FOR 
CHARACTER  62 


23©  DATA  224 , 224 , 224 , 248 ■ 24A , 
FOR  CHARACTER  63 


248 , 240 , 224 : REM  DATA 


24©  END 


114  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


MULTI-COLOR  MODE  GRAPHICS 


Standard  high-resolution  graphics  give  you  control  of  very  small  dots 
on  the  screen.  Each  dot  in  character  memory  can  have  2 possible 
values,  1 for  on  and  0 for  off.  When  a dot  is  off,  the  color  of  the  screen 
is  used  in  the  space  reserved  for  that  dot.  If  the  dot  is  on,  the  dot  is 
colored  with  the  character  color  you  have  chosen  for  that  screen  posi- 
tion. When  you're  using  standard  high-resolution  graphics,  all  the  dots 
within  each  8X8  character  can  either  have  background  color  or  fore- 
ground color.  In  some  ways  this  limits  the  color  resolution  within  that 
space.  For  example,  problems  may  occur  when  two  different  colored 
lines  cross. 

Multi-color  mode  gives  you  a solution  to  this  problem.  Each  dot  in 
multi-color  mode  can  be  one  of  4 colors:  screen  color  (background  color 
register  #0),  the  color  in  background  register  #1,  the  color  in  back- 
ground color  register  #2,  or  character  color.  The  only  sacrifice  is  in  the 
horizontal  resolution,  because  each  multi-color  mode  dot  is  twice  as 
wide  as  a high-resolution  dot.  This  minimal  loss  of  resolution  is  more 
than  compensated  for  by  the  extra  abilities  of  multi-color  mode. 

MULTI-COLOR  MODE  BIT 

To  turn  on  multi-color  character  mode,  set  bit  4 of  the  VIC-II  control 
register  at  53270  ($D016)  to  a 1 by  using  the  following  POKE: 

POKE  53270,PEEK(53270)OR  16 

To  turn  off  multi-color  character  mode,  set  bit  4 of  location  53270  to  a 
0 by  the  following  POKE: 

POKE  53270,PEEK(53270)AND  239 

Multi-color  mode  is  set  on  or  off  for  each  space  on  the  screen,  so  that 
multi-color  graphics  can  be  mixed  with  high-resolution  (hi-res)  graphics. 
This  is  controlled  by  bit  3 in  color  memory.  Color  memory  begins  at 
location  55296  ($D800  in  HEX).  If  the  number  in  color  memory  is  less 
than  8 (0—7)  the  corresponding  space  on  the  video  screen  will  be 
standard  hi-res,  in  the  color  (0—7)  you've  chosen.  If  the  number  located 
in  color  memory  is  greater  or  equal  to  8 (from  8 to  15),  then  that  space 
will  be  displayed  in  multi-color  mode. 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS  1 1 5 


By  POKEing  a number  into  color  memory,  you  can  change  the  color  of 
the  character  in  that  position  on  the  screen.  POKEing  a number  from  0 to 
7 gives  the  normal  character  colors.  POKEing  a number  between  8 and 
15  puts  the  space  into  multi-color  mode.  In  other  words,  turning  BIT  3 
ON  in  color  memory,  sets  MULTI-COLOR  MODE.  Turning  BIT  3 OFF  in 
color  memory,  sets  the  normal,  HIGH-RESOLUTION  mode. 

Once  multi-color  mode  is  set  in  a space,  the  bits  in  the  character 
determine  which  colors  are  displayed  for  the  dots.  For  example,  here  is 
a picture  of  the  letter  A,  and  its  bit  pattern: 


IMAGE 

BIT  PATTERN 

** 

0001 1000 

* * * * * 

00111100 

** 

** 

01100110 

* * * * * * 

01111110 

** 

** 

01100110 

** 

** 

01100110 

** 

* * 

01100110 

00000000 

In  normal  or  high-resolution  mode,  the  screen  color  is  displayed 
everywhere  there  is  a 0 bit,  and  the  character  color  is  displayed  where 
the  bit  is  a 1 . Multi-color  mode  uses  the  bits  in  pairs,  like  so: 


IMAGE 

BIT 

' PATTERN 

AABB 

00 

01 

10 

00 

CCCC 

00 

11 

11 

00 

AABBAABB 

01 

10 

01 

10 

AACCCCBB 

01 

11 

1 1 

10 

AABBAABB 

01 

10 

01 

10 

AABBAABB 

01 

10 

01 

10 

AABBAABB 

01 

10 

01 

10 

00 

00 

00 

00 

In  the  image  area  above,  the  spaces  marked  AA  are  drawn  in  the 
background  #1  color,  the  spaces  marked  BB  use  the  background  #2 
color,  and  the  spaces  marked  CC  use  the  character  color.  The  bit  pairs 
determine  this,  according  to  the  following  chart: 


116  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


BIT  PAIR 

COLOR  REGISTER 

LOCATION 

00 

Background  #0  color  (screen  color) 

53281  ($D021) 

01 

Background  #1  color 

53282  ($D022) 

10 

Background  #2  color 

53283  ($D023) 

11 

Color  specified  by  the 
lower  3 bits  in  color  memory 

color  RAM 

NOTE:  The  sprite  foreground  color  is  a 10.  The  character  foreground  color  is  a 11. 


Type  NEW  and  then  type  this  demonstration  program: 


100  P0KE53281 * 1 : REM  SET  BACKGROUND  COLOR  #8  TO 
WHITE 

118  P0KE53282.*  3 : REM  SET  BACKGROUND  COLOR  #1  TO  CYAN 
128  P0KE53283,8‘.REM  SET  BACKGROUND  COLOR  #2  TO 
ORANGE 

130  POKE53270  .•  PEEK  < 53270  > OR  1 6 : REM  TURN  ON 
MULTICOLOR  MODE 

140  0=13*4096+8*256: REM  SET  C TO  POINT  TO  COLOR 
MEMORY 

150  PR I NTCHR$ < 1 47  > " A A AAA AAA AA " 

168  FORL=0TO9 

170  POKEC+L j 8 ; REM  USE  MULTI  BLACK 
180  NEXT 


The  screen  color  is  white,  the  character  color  is  black,  one  color  regis- 
ter is  cyan  (greenish  blue),  the  other  is  orange. 

You're  not  really  putting  color  codes  in  the  space  for  character  color, 
you're  actually  using  references  to  the  registers  associated  with  those 
colors.  This  conserves  memory,  since  2 bits  can  be  used  to  pick  16  colors 
(background)  or  8 colors  (character).  This  also  makes  some  neat  tricks 
possible.  Simply  changing  one  of  the  indirect  registers  will  change  every 
dot  drawn  in  that  color.  Therefore  everything  drawn  in  the  screen  and 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


117 


background  colors  can  be  changed  on  the  whole  screen  instantly.  Here 
is  an  example  of  changing  background  color  register  #1: 

1 00  POKE53270 ..  PEEK  (.  53270  > OR  1 6 : REM  TURN  OH 
MULTICOLOR  MODE 
1 1 0 F'R  I NTCHRT  < 1 47  > CHRT-  (.  1 8 > ; 

.120  PRINT "(13";  :REM  TVPE  C=  & 1 FOR  ORANGE  OR 
MULTICOLOR  BLACK  BRCKGROI IND 
1 3@  FORL= 1 T022 : PR I NTCHRT < 65  > ; : NEXT 
1 35  FORT= 1 TO500  : NEXT 

.140  PR 
CHANGE 

145  FORT  = 1 TQ580 : NEXT 

_ ...-4!<iSiTl:l  Q 

150  PR I NT "BH IT  A KEV" 

1 60  GET AT : IFfiT=" "THEN 160 
170  X=INT'.:RNDa>*16> 

180  POKE  53282..  X 
130  GOTO  160 


I NT" 


: REM  TVPE  CTRL  & 7 FOR  BLUE  COLOR 


By  using  the  0 key  and  the  COLOR  keys  the  characters  can  be 
changed  to  any  color,  including  multi-color  characters.  For  example, 
type  this  command: 


POKE  53270, PEEK(53270)OR  16.PRINT  " 
MULTI-COLOR  RED 


I REM  LT.RED/ 


The  word  READY  and  anything  else  you  type  will  be  displayed  in 
multi-color  mode.  Another  color  control  can  set  you  back  to  regular  text. 


118  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


Here  is  an  example  of  a program  using  multi-color  programmable 
characters: 


10  REM  * EXAMPLE  2 * 

20  REM  CREATING  MULTI  COLOR  PROGRAMMABLE  CHARACTERS 
3 1 P0KE56334 , PEEK < 56334  > ANB254 : POKE 1 , PEEK < 1 > AND 2 5 1 

35  FOR  I *01063  ’•  REM  CHARACTER  RANGE  TO  BE  COPIED 
FROM  ROM 

36  FORJ-0TO7 : REM  COPY  ALL  8 BYTES  PER  CHARACTER 

37  POKE 1 2288+ 1 #8+ J , PEEK  < 53248+ 1 *8+ J > : REM  COPY  A 
BYTE 

38  NEXT J , I : REM  GOTO  NEXT  BYTE  OR  CHARACTER 

39  POKE 1 , PEEK  < 1 > 0R4 • P0KE56334 , PEEK < 56334  > OR 1 : REM 
TURN  ON  I/O  AND  KB 

40  P0KE53272 , < PEEK  < 53272 > AND240 > + 1 2 : REM  SET  CHAR 
POINTER  TO  MEM.  12288 

50  POKE53270 , PEEK  < 53270  > OR 1 6 

51  P0KE53281 , 0 : REM  SET  BACKGROUND  COLOR  #0  TO  BLACK 

52  P0KE53282.«  2 : REM  SET  BACKGROUND  COLOR  #1  TO  RED 

53  P0KE53283, 7 : REM  SET  BACKGROUND  COLOR  #2  TO 

YELLOW 

60  FORCHAR=60TO63 : REM  PROGRAM  CHARACTERS  60  THRU  63 
80  FORBYTE=0TO7 : REM  DO  ALL  8 BYTES  OF  A CHARACTER 
10©  READNUMBER : REM  READ  1/8TH  OF  CHARACTER  DATA 
1 20  POKE 1 2288+ < 8#CHAR > +BYTE , NUMBER : REM  STORE  THE 
DATA  IN  MEMORY 
140  NEXTBVTE,  CHAR 

150 

PR  I NT  " S''  TAB  < 255  > CHR$  < 60  > CHR$  < 6 1 > TAB  < 55  > CHR$  < 62  > CHR:f  < 63  > 
16©  REM  LINE  15©  PUTS  THE  NEWLY  DEFINED  CHARACTERS 
ON  THE  SCREEN 

17©  GET A# : REM  WAIT  FOR  USER  TO  PRESS  A KEY 
18©  I FA#-" "THEN 170 : REM  IF  NO  KEYS  WERE  PRESSED, 

TRY  AGAIN 

1 9©  P0KE53272 , 2 1 : P0KE53278 , PEEK  < 53270 > AND239 • REM 
RETURN  TO  NORMAL  CHARACTERS 

200  DATA 1 29 , 37 , 2 1 , 29 , 93 , 85 , 85 , 85 : REM  DATA  FOR 
CHARACTER  60 

2 1 0 DATA66 , 72 , 84 , 1 16,117 , 85 , 85 , 85 : REM  DATA  FOR 
C H A R A C TER  6 1 

228  D AT A87 , 87 , 85 , 2 1 , 8 , 8 , 40 , 0 : REM  DATA  FOR 
CHARACTER  62 

230  DAT A 2 1 3 , 2 1 3 , 85 , 84 , 32 , 32 , 40 , 8 : REM  DATA  FOR 
CHARACTER  63 
24©  END 


CLR  /HOME 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


119 


EXTENDED  BACKGROUND  COLOR  MODE 


Extended  background  color  mode  gives  you  control  over  the  back- 
ground color  of  each  individual  character,  as  well  as  over  the  fore- 
ground color.  For  example,  in  this  mode  you  could  display  a blue  char- 
acter with  a yellow  background  on  a white  screen. 

There  are  4 registers  available  for  extended  background  color  mode. 
Each  of  the  registers  can  be  set  to  any  of  the  16  colors. 

Color  memory  is  used  to  hold  the  foreground  color  in  extended  back- 
ground mode.  It  is  used  the  same  as  in  standard  character  mode. 

Extended  character  mode  places  a limit  on  the  number  of  different 
characters  you  can  display,  however.  When  extended  color  mode  is  on, 
only  the  first  64  characters  in  the  character  ROM  (or  the  first  64  char- 
acters in  your  programmable  character  set)  can  be  used.  This  is  be- 
cause two  of  the  bits  of  the  character  code  are  used  to  select  the  back- 
ground color.  It  might  work  something  like  this: 

The  character  code  (the  number  you  would  POKE  to  the  screen)  of  the 
letter  "A"  is  a 1 . When  extended  color  mode  is  on,  if  you  POKEd  a 1 to 
the  screen,  an  "A"  would  appear.  If  you  POKEd  a 65  to  the  screen 
normally,  you  would  expect  the  character  with  character  code  (CHR$) 
129  to  appear,  which  is  a reversed  "A."  This  does  NOT  happen  in  ex- 
tended color  mode.  Instead  you  get  the  same  unreversed  "A"  as  before, 

but  on  a different  background  color.  The  following  chart  gives  the 
codes: 


CHARACTER  CODE 

BACKGROUND  COLOR  REGISTER 

RANGE  BIT  7 BIT  6 

NUMBER  ADDRESS 

0-63  0 0 

64-127  0 1 

128-191  1 o 

192-255  1 1 

0 53281  ($D021) 

1 53282  ($D022) 

2 53283  ($D023) 

3 53284  ($D024) 

Extended  color  mode  is  turned  ON  by  setting  bit  6 of  the  VIC-II  regis 
ter  to  a 1 at  location  53265  ($D01 1 in  HEX).  The  following  POKE  does  it: 

POKE  53265,  PEEK(53265)OR  64 


120  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


Extended  color  mode  is  turned  OFF  by  setting  bit  6 of  the  VIC-II  regis- 
ter to  a 0 at  location  53265  ($D01 1).  The  following  statement  will  do  this: 

POKE  53265,  PEEK(53265)AND  191 

BIT  MAPPED  GRAPHICS 

When  writing  games,  plotting  charts  for  business  applications,  or 
other  types  of  programs,  sooner  or  later  you  get  to  the  point  where  you 
want  high-resolution  displays. 

The  Commodore  64  has  been  designed  to  do  just  that:  high  resolution 
is  available  through  bit  mapping  of  the  screen.  Bit  mapping  is  the 
method  in  which  each  possible  dot  (pixel)  of  resolution  on  the  screen  is 
assigned  its  own  bit  (location)  in  memory.  If  that  memory  bit  is  a one, 
the  dot  it  is  assigned  to  is  on.  If  the  bit  is  set  to  zero,  the  dot  is  off. 

High-resolution  graphic  design  has  a couple  of  drawbacks,  which  is 
why  it  is  not  used  all  the  time.  First  of  all,  it  takes  lots  of  memory  to  bit 
map  the  entire  screen.  This  is  because  every  pixel  must  have  a memory 
bit  to  control  it.  You  are  going  to  need  one  bit  of  memory  for  each  pixel 
(or  one  byte  for  8 pixels).  Since  each  character  is  8 by  8,  and  there  are 
40  lines  with  25  characters  in  each  line,  the  resolution  is  320  pixels  (dots) 
by  200  pixels  for  the  whole  screen.  That  gives  you  64000  separate  dots, 
each  of  which  requires  a bit  in  memory.  In  other  words,  8000  bytes  of 
memory  are  needed  to  map  the  whole  screen. 

Generally,  high-resolution  operations  are  made  of  many  short,  sim- 
ple, repetitive  routines.  Unfortunately,  this  kind  of  thing  is  usually  rather 
slow  if  you  are  trying  to  write  high-resolution  routines  in  BASIC.  How- 
ever, short,  simple,  repetitive  routines  are  exactly  what  machine  lan- 
guage does  best.  The  solution  is  to  either  write  your  programs  entirely  in 
machine  language,  or  call  machine  language,  high-resolution  sub- 
routines from  your  BASIC  program  using  the  SYS  command  from  BASIC. 
That  way  you  get  both  the  ease  of  writing  in  BASIC,  and  the  speed  of 
machine  language  for  graphics.  The  VSP  cartridge  is  also  available  to 
add  high-resolution  commands  to  COMMODORE  64  BASIC. 

All  of  the  examples  given  in  this  section  will  be  in  BASIC  to  make  them 
clear.  Now  to  the  technical  details. 

BIT  MAPPING  is  one  of  the  most  popular  graphics  techniques  in  the 
computer  world.  It  is  used  to  create  highly  detailed  pictures.  Basically, 
when  the  Commodore  64  goes  into  bit  map  mode,  it  directly  displays  an 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS  121 


8K  section  of  memory  on  the  TV  screen.  When  in  bit  map  mode,  you  can 
directly  control  whether  an  individual  dot  on  the  screen  is  on  or  off. 

There  are  two  types  of  bit  mapping  available  on  the  Commodore  64. 
They  are: 


1)  Standard  (high-resolution)  bit  mapped  mode  (320-dot  by  200-dot 
resolution) 

2)  Multi-color  bit  mapped  mode  (160-dot  by  200-dot  resolution) 

Each  is  very  similar  to  the  character  type  it  is  named  for:  standard  has 
greater  resolution,  but  fewer  color  selections.  On  the  other  hand,  multi- 
color bit  mapping  trades  horizontal  resolution  for  a greater  number  of 
colors  in  an  8-dot  by  8-dot  square. 

STANDARD  HIGH-RESOLUTION  BIT  MAP  MODE 


Standard  bit  map  mode  gives  you  a 320  horizontal  dot  by  200  vertical 
dot  resolution,  with  a choice  of  2 colors  in  each  8-dot  by  8-dot  section. 
Bit  map  mode  is  selected  (turned  ON)  by  setting  bit  5 of  the  VIC-II 
control  register  to  a 1 at  location  53265  ($D011  in  HEX).  The  following 
POKE  will  do  this: 


POKE  53265, PEEK(53265)OR  32 


Bit  map  mode  is  turned  OFF  by  setting  bit  5 of  the  VIC-II  control 
register  to  0 at  location  53265  ($D011),  like  this: 

POKE  53265, PEE K(53265)AN D 223 

Before  we  get  into  the  details  of  the  bit  map  mode,  there  is  one  more 
issue  to  tackle,  and  that  is  where  to  locate  the  bit  map  area. 

HOW  IT  WORKS 

If  you  remember  the  PROGRAMMABLE  CHARACTERS  section  you  will 
recall  that  you  were  able  to  set  the  bit  pattern  of  a character  stored  in 
RAM  to  almost  anything  you  wanted.  If  at  the  same  time  you  change  the 
character  that  is  displayed  on  the  screen,  you  would  be  able  to  change 
a single  dot,  and  watch  it  happen.  This  is  the  basis  of  bit-mapping.  The 


122  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


entire  screen  is  filled  with  programmable  characters,  and  you  make 
your  changes  directly  into  the  memory  that  the  programmable  char- 
acters get  their  patterns  from. 

Each  of  the  locations  in  screen  memory  that  were  used  to  control  what 
character  was  displayed,  are  now  used  for  color  information.  For 
example,  instead  of  POKEing  a 1 in  location  1024  to  make  an  "A"  ap- 
pear in  the  top  left  hand  corner  of  the  screen,  location  1024  now  con- 
trols the  colors  of  the  bits  in  that  top  left  space. 

Colors  of  squares  in  bit  map  mode  do  not  come  from  color  memory, 
as  they  do  in  the  character  modes.  Instead,  colors  are  taken  from 
screen  memory.  The  upper  4 bits  of  screen  memory  become  the  color  of 
any  bit  that  is  set  to  1 in  the  8 by  8 area  controlled  by  that  screen 
memory  location.  The  lower  4 bits  become  the  color  of  any  bit  that  is  set 
to  a 0. 

EXAMPLE:  Type  the  following: 


5 BflSE*2#4096 : P0KE53272 , PEEK  < 53272 > 0R8 : REM  PUT  E I T 
MAP  AT  8192 

1©  P0KE532S5 .<  PEEK < 53265 > 0R32  : REM  ENTER  BIT  MAP  MODE 


Now  RUN  the  program. 

Garbage  appears  on  the  screen,  right?  Just  like  the  normal  screen 
mode,  you  have  to  clear  the  HIGH-RESOLUTION  (HI-RES)  screen  before 
you  use  it.  Unfortunately,  printing  a CLR  won't  work  in  this  case.  Instead 
you  have  to  clear  out  the  section  of  memory  that  you're  using  for  your 
programmable  characters.  Hit  the  and  keys,  then 

add  the  following  lines  to  your  program  to  clear  the  HI-RES  screen: 


20  F0RIssBASET0BASE+7999  : POKE  I > 0 : NEXT  ■ REM  CLEAR  BIT 
MAP 

30  FOR  1 = 1 024TO2023 : POKE  I .•  3 : NEXT : REM  SET  COLOR  TO 
CVfiN  AND  BLACK 


Now  RUN  the  program  again.  You  should  see  the  screen  clearing,  then 
the  greenish  blue  color,  cyan,  should  cover  the  whole  screen.  What  we 
want  to  do  now  is  to  turn  the  dots  on  and  off  on  the  HI-RES  screen. 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


123 


To  SET  a dot  (turn  a dot  ON)  or  UNSET  a dot  (turn  a dot  OFF)  you  must 
know  how  to  find  the  correct  bit  in  the  character  memory  that  you  have 
to  set  to  a 1 . In  other  words,  you  have  to  find  the  character  you  need  to 
change,  the  row  of  the  character,  and  which  bit  of  the  row  that  you 
have  to  change.  You  need  a formula  to  calculate  this. 

We  will  use  X and  Y to  stand  for  the  horizontal  and  vertical  positions 
of  a dot.  The  dot  where  X=0  and  Y=0  is  at  the  upper-left  of  the  dis- 
play. Dots  to  the  right  have  higher  X values,  and  the  dots  toward  the 
bottom  have  higher  Y values.  The  best  way  to  use  bit  mapping  is  to 
arrange  the  bit  map  display  something  like  this: 


319 


Y 


199 


Each  dot  will  have  an  X and  a Y coordinate.  With  this  format  it  is  easy 
to  control  any  dot  on  the  screen. 


124  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


However,  what  you  actually  have  is  something  like  this: 


LU 

Z o 


BYTE 

0 

BYTE 

8 BYTE  16  BYTE  24  

BYTE 

312 

BYTE 

1 

BYTE 

9 

BYTE 

313 

BYTE 

2 

BYTE 

10 

BYTE 

314 

BYTE 

3 

BYTE 

11 

BYTE 

315 

BYTE 

4 

BYTE 

12 

BYTE 

316 

BYTE 

5 

BYTE 

13  . 

BYTE 

317 

BYTE 

6 

BYTE 

14 

BYTE 

318 

BYTE 

7 

BYTE 

15 

BYTE 

319 

BYTE 

320 

BYTE 

328  BYTE  336  BYTE  344  ..  . 

BYTE 

632 

BYTE 

321 

BYTE 

329 

BYTE 

633 

BYTE 

322 

BYTE 

330  . 

BYTE 

634 

BYTE 

323 

BYTE 

331 

BYTE 

635 

BYTE 

324 

BYTE 

332 

BYTE 

636 

BYTE 

325 

BYTE 

333  . 

BYTE 

637 

BYTE 

326 

BYTE 

334 

BYTE 

638 

_ BYTE 

327 

BYTE 

335 

BYTE 

639 

The  programmable  characters  which  make  up  the  bit  map  are  ar- 
ranged in  25  rows  of  40  columns  each.  While  this  is  a good  method  of 
organization  for  text,  it  makes  bit  mapping  somewhat  difficult.  (There  is 
a good  reason  for  this  method.  See  the  section  on  MIXED  MODES.) 

The  following  formula  will  make  it  easier  to  control  a dot  on  the  bit 
map  screen: 

The  start  of  the  display  memory  area  is  known  as  the  BASE.  The  row 
number  (from  0 to  24)  of  your  dot  is: 

ROW  = INT(Y/8)  (There  are  320  bytes  per  line.) 


The  character  position  on  that  line  (from  0 to  39)  is: 

CHAR  = INT(X/8)  (There  are  8 bytes  per  character.) 
The  line  of  that  character  position  (from  0 to  7)  is: 

LINE  = Y AND  7 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS  125 


; 


The  bit  of  that  byte  is: 
BIT  = 7— (X  AND  7) 


Now  we  put  these  formulas  together.  The  byte  in  which  character 
memory  dot  (X,Y)  is  located  is  calculated  by: 

BYTE  = BASE  + ROW*320+  CHAR*8  + LINE 


To  turn  on  any  bit  on  the  grid  with  coordinates  (X,Y),  use  this  line: 

POKE  BYTE,  PEEK(BYTE)  OR  2|BIT 


Lets  add  these  calculations  to  the  program.  In  the  following  example, 
the  COMMODORE  64  will  plot  a sine  curve: 

50  FORX*0TO319STEP.5:REM  WAVE  WILL  FILL  THE  S FREEH 
60  V~  I NT  <!  90+80*8 1 N •'  X/ 1 0 
70  CH==INTCX/8> 

80  R0= I NT  < V/8  > 

85  LN«VflNH? 

90  B V «=  B R S E + R O # 3 2 0 + 8 * C H + L N 
100  BI«7-<XAND7> 

1 1 0 F'OKEBV , PEEK  C BV  > OR  C 2 TB I 

120  next;*: 

125  POKE 1024, IS 
130  GOTO 130 


The  calculation  in  line  60  will  change  the  values  for  the  sine  function 
from  a range  of  +1  to  -1  to  a range  of  10  to  170.  Lines  70  to  100 
calculate  the  character,  row,  byte,  and  bit  being  affected,  using  the 
formulae  as  shown  above.  Line  125  signals  the  program  is  finished  by 
changing  the  color  of  the  top  left  corner  of  the  screen.  Line  130  freezes 
the  program  by  putting  it  into  an  infinite  loop.  When  you  have  finished 
looking  at  the  display,  just  hold  down  and  hit  frUMrU 


126  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


As  a further  example,  you  can  modify  the  sine  curve  program  to  dis- 
play a semicircle.  Here  are  the  lines  to  type  to  make  the  changes: 

50  FORX®0TO1S0:REM  DO  HALF  THE  SCREEN 

55  V 1 a i 00+SQR < 1 60*X-X#X > 

56  Y2= 1 00-SQR < 1 60 #X-X#X > 

60  FORV*V 1 T0V2STEPV 1 - V2 
70  CH- 1 NT < X/S  > 

80  R0aINT<V/8> 

85  LN*VflND7 

90  BV»BRSE+RO#320+8#CH+LN 
.100  BI«7~<XflND7> 

1 1 0 F'OKEBV , PEEK  < BV  > OR  < 2 TB I > 

114  NEXT 


This  will  create  a semicircle  in  the  HI-RES  area  of  the  screen. 


WARNING:  BASIC  variables  can  overlay  your  high-resolution  screen.  If  you  need 
more  memory  space  you  must  move  the  bottom  of  BASIC  above  the  high-resolution 
screen  area.  Or,  you  must  move  your  high-resolution  screen  area.  This  problem  will 
NOT  occur  in  machine  language.  It  ONLY  happens  when  you're  writing  programs  in 
BASIC. 


MULTI-COLOR  BIT  MAP  MODE 

Like  multi-color  mode  characters,  multi-color  bit  map  mode  allows  you 
to  display  up  to  four  different  colors  in  each  8 by  8 section  of  bit  map. 
And  as  in  multi-character  mode,  there  is  a sacrifice  of  horizontal  resolu- 
tion (from  320  dots  to  160  dots). 

Multi-color  bit  map  mode  uses  an  8K  section  of  memory  for  the  bit 
map.  You  select  your  colors  for  multi-color  bit  map  mode  from  (1)  the 
background  color  register  0,  (the  screen  background  color),  (2)  the  video 
matrix  (the  upper  4 bits  give  one  possible  color,  the  lower  4 bits  an- 
other), and  (3)  color  memory. 

Multi-color  bit  mapped  mode  is  turned  ON  by  setting  bit  5 of  53265 
($D01 1)  and  bit  4 at  location  53270  ($D016)  to  a 1 . The  following  POKE 
does  this: 

POKE  53265,PEEK(53625)OR  32:  POKE  53270,PEEK(53270)OR  16 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


127 


Multi-color  bit  mapped  mode  is  turned  OFF  by  setting  bit  5 of  53265 
($ DO  1 1)  and  bit  4 at  location  53270  ($D016)  to  a 0.  The  following  POKE 
does  this: 

POKE  53265/PEEK(53265)AND  223:  POKE  53270/PEEK(53270)AND  239 


As  in  standard  (HI-RES)  bit  mapped  mode,  there  is  a one  to  one  cor- 
respondence between  the  8K  section  of  memory  being  used  for  the  dis- 
play, and  what  is  shown  on  the  screen.  However,  the  horizontal  dots  are 
two  bits  wide.  Each  2 bits  in  the  display  memory  area  form  a dot,  which 
can  have  one  of  4 colors. 


BITS  COLOR  INFORMATION  COMES  FROM 

Background  color  #0  (screen  color) 

01  Upper  4 bits  of  screen  memory 

10  Lower  4 bits  of  screen  memory 

1 1 Color  nybble  (nybble  = 1/2  byte  = 4 bits) 


SMOOTH  SCROLLING 

The  VIC-II  chip  supports  smooth  scrolling  in  both  the  horizontal  and 
vertical  directions.  Smooth  scrolling  is  a one  pixel  movement  of  the 
entire  screen  in  one  direction.  It  can  move  either  up,  or  down,  or  left,  or 
right.  It  is  used  to  move  new  information  smoothly  onto  the  screen,  while 
smoothly  removing  characters  from  the  other  side. 

While  the  VIC-II  chip  does  much  of  the  task  for  you,  the  actual  scroll- 
ing must  be  done  by  a machine  language  program.  The  VIC-II  chip 
features  the  ability  to  place  the  video  screen  in  any  of  8 horizontal  posi- 
tions, and  8 vertical  positions.  Positioning  is  controlled  by  the  VIC-II 
scrolling  registers.  The  VIC-II  chip  also  has  a 38  column  mode,  and  a 24 
row  mode,  the  smaller  screen  sizes  are  used  to  give  you  a place  for  your 
new  data  to  scroll  on  from. 

The  following  are  the  steps  for  SMOOTH  SCROLLING: 


128  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


1)  Shrink  the  screen  (the  border  will  expand). 

2)  Set  the  scrolling  register  to  maximum  (or  minimum  value  depend- 
ing upon  the  direction  of  your  scroll). 

3)  Place  the  new  data  on  the  proper  (covered)  portion  of  the  screen. 

4)  Increment  (or  decrement)  the  scrolling  register  until  it  reaches  the 
maximum  (or  minimum)  value. 

5)  At  this  point,  use  your  machine  language  routine  to  shift  the  entire 
screen  one  entire  character  in  the  direction  of  the  scroll. 

6)  Go  back  to  step  2. 

To  go  into  38  column  mode,  bit  3 of  location  53270  ($D016)  must  be 
set  to  a 0.  The  following  POKE  does  this: 

POKE  53270,PEEK(53270)AND  247 

To  return  to  40  column  mode,  set  bit  3 of  location  53270  ($D016)  to  a 
1.  The  following  POKE  does  this: 

POKE  53270, PEEK(53270)OR  8 

To  go  into  24  row  mode,  bit  3 of  location  53265  ($D01 1)  must  be  set  to 
a 0.  The  following  POKE  will  do  this: 

POKE  53265, PEE K(53265)AN D 247 

To  return  to  25  row  mode,  set  bit  3 of  location  53265  ($D01 1)  to  a 1. 
The  following  POKE  does  this: 

POKE  53265,PEEK(53265)OR  8 

When  scrolling  in  the  X direction,  it  is  necessary  to  place  the  VIC-II 
chip  into  38  column  mode.  This  gives  new  data  a place  to  scroll  from. 
When  scrolling  LEFT,  the  new  data  should  be  placed  on  the  right.  When 
scrolling  RIGHT  the  new  data  should  be  placed  on  the  left.  Please  note 
that  there  are  still  40  columns  to  screen  memory,  but  only  38  are  visible. 

When  scrolling  in  the  Y direction,  it  is  necessary  to  place  the  VIC-II  chip 
into  24  row  mode.  When  scrolling  UP,  place  the  new  data  in  the  LAST 
row.  When  scrolling  DOWN,  place  the  new  data  on  the  FIRST  row.  Un- 
like X scrolling,  where  there  are  covered  areas  on  each  side  of  the 
screen,  there  is  only  one  covered  area  in  Y scrolling.  When  the  Y scroll- 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


129 


ing  register  is  set  to  0,  the  first  line  is  covered,  ready  for  new  data. 
When  the  Y scrolling  register  is  set  to  7 the  last  row  is  covered. 

For  scrolling  in  the  X direction,  the  scroll  register  is  located  in  bits  2 to 
0 of  the  VIC-II  control  register  at  location  53270  ($D016  in  HEX).  As 
always,  it  is  important  to  affect  only  those  bits.  The  following  POKE  does 
this: 


POKE  53270,  (PEEK(53270)AND  248) +X 

where  X is  the  X position  of  the  screen  from  0 to  7. 

For  scrolling  in  the  Y direction,  the  scroll  register  is  located  in  bits  2 to 
0 of  the  VIC-II  control  register  at  location  53265  ($D011  in  HEX).  As 
always,  it  is  important  to  affect  only  those  bits.  The  following  POKE  does 
this: 


POKE  53265,  (PEEK(53265)AND  248)+Y 


where  Y is  the  Y position  of  the  screen  from  0 to  7. 

To  scroll  text  onto  the  screen  from  the  bottom,  you  would  step  the 
low-order  3 bits  of  location  53265  from  0-7,  put  more  data  on  the 
covered  line  at  the  bottom  of  the  screen,  and  then  repeat  the  process. 
To  scroll  characters  onto  the  screen  from  left  to  right,  you  would  step  the 
low-order  3 bits  of  location  53270  from  0 to  7,  print  or  POKE  another 
column  of  new  data  into  column  0 of  the  screen,  then  repeat  the  pro- 
cess. 

If  you  step  the  scroll  bits  by  -1,  your  text  will  move  in  the  opposite 
direction. 

EXAMPLE:  Text  scrolling  onto  the  bottom  of  the  screen: 


1 0 P0KES3265  .•  PEEK  < 53265  > AND247 
INTO  24  ROW  MODE 
20  PRINTCHR*a47> 

CLEAR  THE  SCREEN 

80  FORX=  1 T024  : PR  I NTCHF.T  < 17>  ; ■ NErtT 
THE  CURSOR  TO  THE  BOTTOM 

40  P0KE53265 , < PEEK  < 53265  ) AND24S  > + <'  PR  I NT 
POSITION  FOR  1ST  SCROLL 


50  PRINT"  HELLO"; 

69  FGRP=6TO0STEP- 1 

P0KE53265  .■  < PEEK  < 53265  AND243  ) +F 


80  FORX=  1 TO50  '■  NEXT 
DEI-flV  LOOP 
80  NEXT = GOTO40 


REM  GO 


REM 


REM  MOVE 


: REM 


: REM 


130  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


SPRITES 


A SPRITE  is  a special  type  of  user  definable  character  which  can  be 
displayed  anywhere  on  the  screen.  Sprites  are  maintained  directly  by 
the  VIC-II  chip.  And  all  you  have  to  do  is  tell  a sprite  "what  to  look  like," 
"what  color  to  be,"  and  "where  to  appear."  The  VIC-II  chip  will  do  the 
rest!  Sprites  can  be  any  of  the  16  colors  available. 

Sprites  can  be  used  with  ANY  of  the  other  graphics  modes,  bit 
mapped,  character,  multi-color,  etc.,  and  they'll  keep  their  shape  in  all 
of  them.  The  sprite  carries  its  own  color  definition,  its  own  mode  (HI-RES 
or  multi-colored),  and  its  own  shape. 

Up  to  8 sprites  at  a time  can  be  maintained  by  the  VIC-II  chip  auto- 
matically. More  sprites  can  be  displayed  using  RASTER  INTERRUPT 
techniques. 

The  features  of  SPRITES  include: 

1)  24  horizontal  dot  by  21  vertical  dot  size. 

2)  Individual  color  control  for  each  sprite. 

3)  Sprite  multi-color  mode. 

4)  Magnification  (2X)  in  horizontal,  vertical,  or  both  directions. 

5)  Selectable  sprite  to  background  priority. 

6)  Fixed  sprite  to  sprite  priorities. 

7)  Sprite  to  sprite  collision  detection. 

8)  Sprite  to  background  collision  detection. 


These  special  sprite  abilities  make  it  simple  to  program  many  arcade 
style  games.  Because  the  sprites  are  maintained  by  hardware,  it  is  even 
possible  to  write  a good  quality  game  in  BASIC! 

There  are  8 sprites  supported  directly  by  the  VIC-II  chip.  They  are 
numbered  from  0 to  7.  Each  of  the  sprites  has  it  own  definition  location, 
position  registers  and  color  register,  and  has  its  own  bits  for  enable  and 
collision  detection. 

DEFINING  A SPRITE 

Sprites  are  defined  like  programmable  characters  are  defined.  How- 
ever, since  the  size  of  the  sprite  is  larger,  more  bytes  are  needed.  A 
sprite  is  24  by  21  dots,  or  504  dots.  This  works  out  to  63  bytes  (504/8 

PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS  131 


Figure  3-2.  Sprite  Definition  Block. 


132 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


bits)  needed  to  define  a sprite.  The  63  bytes  are  arranged  in  21  rows  of 
3 bytes  each.  A sprite  definition  looks  like  this: 


BYTE  0 
BYTE  3 
BYTE  6 


BYTE  1 
BYTE  4 
BYTE  7 


BYTE  2 
BYTE  5 
BYTE  8 


BYTE  60 


BYTE  61 


BYTE  62 


Another  way  to  view  how  a sprite  is  created  is  to  take  a look  at  the 
sprite  definition  block  on  the  bit  level.  It  would  look  something  like  Figure 


3-2. 


In  a standard  (HI-RES)  sprite,  each  bit  set  to  1 is  displayed  in  that 
sprite's  foreground  color.  Each  bit  set  to  0 is  transparent  and  will  display 
whatever  data  is  behind  it.  This  is  similar  to  a standard  character. 

Multi-color  sprites  are  similar  to  multi-color  characters.  Horizontal 
resolution  is  traded  for  extra  color  resolution.  The  resolution  of  the  sprite 
becomes  12  horizontal  dots  by  21  vertical  dots.  Each  dot  in  the  sprite 
becomes  twice  as  wide,  but  the  number  of  colors  displayable  in  the 
sprite  is  increased  to  4. 


SPRITE  POINTERS 


Even  though  each  sprite  takes  only  63  bytes  to  define,  one  more  byte 
is  needed  as  a place  holder  at  the  end  of  each  sprite.  Each  sprite,  then, 
takes  up  64  bytes.  This  makes  it  easy  to  calculate  where  in  memory  your 
sprite  definition  is,  since  64  bytes  is  an  even  number  and  in  binary  it's  an 
even  power. 

Each  of  the  8 sprites  has  a byte  associated  with  it  called  the  SPRITE 
POINTER.  The  sprite  pointers  control  where  each  sprite  definition  is  lo- 
cated in  memory.  These  8 bytes  are  always  located  as  the  last  8 bytes 
of  the  IK  chunk  of  screen  memory.  Normally,  on  the  Commodore  64, 
this  means  they  begin  at  location  2040  ($07F8  in  HEX).  However,  if  you 
move  the  screen,  the  location  of  your  sprite  pointers  will  also  move. 

Each  sprite  pointer  can  hold  a number  from  0 to  255.  This  number 
points  to  the  definition  for  that  sprite.  Since  each  sprite  definition  takes 
64  bytes,  that  means  that  the  pointer  can  "see"  anywhere  in  the  16K 
block  of  memory  that  the  VIC-II  chip  can  access  (since  256*64=  16K). 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS  133 


If  sprite  pointer  #0,  at  location  2040,  contains  the  number  14,  for 
example,  this  means  that  sprite  0 will  be  displayed  using  the  64  bytes 
beginning  at  location  14*64  = 896  which  is  in  the  cassette  buffer.  The 
following  formula  makes  this  clear: 

LOCATION  = (BANK  * 16384)  4-  (SPRITE  POINTER  VALUE  * 64) 

Where  BANK  is  the  16K  segment  of  memory  that  the  VIC-II  chip  is  look- 
ing at  and  is  from  0 to  3. 

The  above  formula  gives  the  start  of  the  64  bytes  of  the  sprite 
definition  block. 

When  the  VIC-II  chip  is  looking  at  BANK  0 or  BANK  2,  there  is  a ROM 
IMAGE  of  the  character  set  present  in  certain  locations,  as  mentioned 
before.  Sprite  definitions  can  NOT  be  placed  there.  If  for  some  reason 
you  need  more  than  128  different  sprite  definitions,  you  should  use  one 
of  the  banks  without  the  ROM  IMAGE,  1 or  3. 


TURNING  SPRITES  ON 

The  VIC-II  control  register  at  location  53269  ($D015  in  HEX)  is  known 
as  the  SPRITE  ENABLE  register.  Each  of  the  sprites  has  a bit  in  this 
register  which  controls  whether  that  sprite  is  ON  or  OFF.  The  register 
looks  like  this: 


$D01 5 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 

To  turn  on  sprite  1,  for  example,  it  is  necessary  to  turn  that  bit  to  a 1 . 
The  following  POKE  does  this: 

POKE  53269, PEEK(53269)OR  2 


A more  general  statement  would  be  the  following: 

POKE  53269, PEEK(53269)OR  (2|SN) 


where  SN  is  the  sprite  number,  from  0 to  7. 


NOTE:  A sprite  must  be  turned  ON  before  it  can  be  seen. 


134  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


TURNING  SPRITES  OFF 


A sprite  is  turned  off  by  setting  its  bit  in  the  VIC-II  control  register  at 
53269  ($D015  in  HEX)  to  a 0.  The  following  POKE  will  do  this: 

POKE  53269,  PEEK(53269)AND  (255-2|SN) 


where  SN  is  the  sprite  number  from  0 to  7. 


COLORS 


A sprite  can  be  any  of  the  16  colors  generated  by  the  VIC-II  chip. 
Each  of  the  sprites  has  its  own  sprite  color  register.  These  are  the  mem- 
ory locations  of  the  color  registers: 


ADDRESS 

DESCRIPTION 

53287 

($D027) 

SPRITE  0 COLOR  REGISTER 

53288 

($D028) 

SPRITE  1 COLOR  REGISTER 

53289 

($D029) 

SPRITE  2 COLOR  REGISTER 

53290 

($D02A) 

SPRITE  3 COLOR  REGISTER 

53291 

($D02B) 

SPRITE  4 COLOR  REGISTER 

53292 

($D02C) 

SPRITE  5 COLOR  REGISTER 

53293 

($D02D) 

SPRITE  6 COLOR  REGISTER 

53294 

($D02E) 

SPRITE  7 COLOR  REGISTER 

All  dots  in  the  sprite  will  be  displayed  in  the  color  contained  in  the 
sprite  color  register.  The  rest  of  the  sprite  will  be  transparent,  and  will 
show  whatever  is  behind  the  sprite. 


MULTI-COLOR  MODE 

Multi-color  mode  allows  you  to  have  up  to  4 different  colors  in  each 
sprite.  However,  just  like  other  multi-color  modes,  horizontal  resolution  is 
cut  in  half.  In  other  words,  when  you're  working  with  sprite  multi-color 
mode  (like  in  multi-color  character  mode),  instead  of  24  dots  across  the 
sprite,  there  are  12  pairs  of  dots.  Each  pair  of  dots  is  called  a BIT  PAIR. 
Think  of  each  bit  pair  (pair  of  dots)  as  a single  dot  in  your  overall  sprite 
when  it  comes  to  choosing  colors  for  the  dots  in  your  sprites.  The  table 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


135 


below  gives  you  the  bit  pair  values  needed  to  turn  ON  each  of  the  four 
colors  you've  chosen  for  your  sprite: 


BIT  PAIR 

DESCRIPTION 

00 

TRANSPARENT,  SCREEN  COLOR 

01 

SPRITE  MULTI-COLOR  REGISTER  #0  (53285)  ($D025) 

10 

SPRITE  COLOR  REGISTER 

11 

SPRITE  MULTI-COLOR  REGISTER  #1  (53286)  ($D026) 

I NOTE:  The  sprite  foreground  color  is  a 10.  The  character  foreground  is  a 11. 

SETTING  A SPRITE  TO  MULTI-COLOR  MODE 

To  switch  a sprite  into  multi-color  mode  you  must  turn  ON  the  VIC-I 
control  register  at  location  53276  ($D01C).  The  following  POKE  does  this: 

POKE  53276,  PEEK(53276)  OR  (2fSN) 

where  SN  is  the  sprite  number  (0  to  7). 

To  switch  a sprite  out  of  multi-color  mode  you  must  turn  OFF  the  VIC-II 
control  register  at  location  53276  ($D01C).  The  following  POKE  does  this: 

POKE  53276,PEEK(53276)  AND  (255— 2fSN) 

where  SN  is  the  sprite  number  (0  to  7). 


EXPANDED  SPRITES 

-T" chip  the  ability  to  expand  a sprite  in  the  verticai  dir®c- 

in  the  s6  t°r,ZOnt  °"'  °r  both  at  once-  When  expanded,  each  dot 

ncreal  '* T™  ^ ^ ’Wfce  °S  ,alL  Resolution  d°«"'t  actually 
increase  ...  the  sprite  just  gets  bigger.  Y 

JbJ£7d  °; ln  ,he  <“"«*<».  the  corresponding  bi,  in 

t J Am?  re9'Ster  Qt  loCation  53277  ($D01D  in  HEX)  must  be 

Tin  <S"  ° ”•  The  ,0ll<>Wln9  POK£  in  -he  X 


POKE  53277,PEEK(53277)OR  (2|SN) 


where  SN  is  the  sprite  number  from  0 to  7. 
136  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


To  unexpand  a sprite  in  the  horizontal  direction,  the  corresponding  bit 
in  the  VIC-II  control  register  at  location  53277  ($D01D  in  HEX)  must  be 
turned  OFF  (set  to  a 0).  The  following  POKE  "unexpands"  a sprite  in  the 
X direction: 

POKE  53277,PEEK(53277)AND  (255-2|SN) 

where  SN  is  the  sprite  number  from  0 to  7. 

To  expand  a sprite  in  the  vertical  direction,  the  corresponding  bit  in 
the  VIC-II  control  register  at  location  53271  ($D017  in  HEX)  must  be 
turned  ON  (set  to  a 1).  The  following  POKE  expands  a sprite  in  the  Y 
direction: 

POKE  53271 , PEE K(53271)OR  (2|SN) 

where  SN  is  the  sprite  number  from  0 to  7. 

To  unexpand  a sprite  in  the  vertical  direction,  the  corresponding  bit  in 
the  VIC-II  control  register  at  location  53271  ($D017  in  HEX)  must  be 
turned  OFF  (set  to  a 0).  The  following  POKE  "unexpands"  a sprite  in  the 
Y direction: 

POKE  53271 , PEE K(53271)AND  (255-2|SN) 

where  SN  is  the  sprite  number  from  0 to  7. 

SPRITE  POSITIONING 

Once  you've  made  a sprite  you  want  to  be  able  to  move  it  around  the 
screen.  To  do  this,  your  Commodore  64  uses  three  positioning  registers: 

1)  SPRITE  X POSITION  REGISTER 

2)  SPRITE  Y POSITION  REGISTER 

3)  MOST  SIGNIFICANT  BIT  X POSITION  REGISTER 

Each  sprite  has  an  X position  register,  a Y position  register,  and  a bit 
in  the  X most  significant  bit  register.  This  lets  you  position  your  sprites 
very  accurately.  You  can  place  your  sprite  in  512  possible  X positions 
and  256  possible  Y positions. 

The  X and  Y position  registers  work  together,  in  pairs,  as  a team.  The 
locations  of  the  X and  Y registers  appear  in  the  memory  map  as  follows: 
First  is  the  X register  for  sprite  0,  then  the  Y register  for  sprite  0.  Next 

PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS  137 


: 


comes  the  X register  for  sprite  1,  the  Y register  for  sprite  1,  and  so  on. 
After  all  16  X and  Y registers  comes  the  most  significant  bit  in  the  X 
position  (X  MSB)  located  in  its  own  register. 

The  chart  below  lists  the  locations  of  each  sprite  position  register.  You 
use  the  locations  at  their  appropriate  time  through  POKE  statements: 


LOCATION 

DESCRIPTION 

DECIMAL 

HEX 

53248 

($D000) 

SPRITE  0 X POSITION  REGISTER 

53249 

($D001) 

SPRITE  0 Y POSITION  REGISTER 

53250 

($D002) 

SPRITE  1 X POSITION  REGISTER 

53251 

($D003) 

SPRITE  1 Y POSITION  REGISTER 

53252 

($D004) 

SPRITE  2 X POSITION  REGISTER 

53253 

($D005) 

SPRITE  2 Y POSITION  REGISTER 

53254 

($D006) 

SPRITE  3 X POSITION  REGISTER 

53255 

($D007) 

SPRITE  3 Y POSITION  REGISTER 

53256 

($D008) 

SPRITE  4 X POSITION  REGISTER 

53257 

($D009) 

SPRITE  4 Y POSITION  REGISTER 

53258 

($D00A) 

SPRITE  5 X POSITION  REGISTER 

53259 

($D00B) 

SPRITE  5 Y POSITION  REGISTER 

53260 

($D00C) 

SPRITE  6 X POSITION  REGISTER 

53261 

($D00D) 

SPRITE  6 Y POSITION  REGISTER 

53262 

($D00E) 

SPRITE  7 X POSITION  REGISTER 

53263 

($D00F) 

SPRITE  7 Y POSITION  REGISTER 

53264 

($D01 0) 

SPRITE  X MSB  REGISTER 

The  position  of  a sprite  is  calculated  from  the  TOP  LEFT  corner  of  the 
24  dot  by  21  dot  area  that  your  sprite  can  be  designed  in.  It  does  NOT 
matter  how  many  or  how  few  dots  you  use  to  make  up  a sprite.  Even  if 
only  one  dot  is  used  as  a sprite,  and  you  happen  to  want  it  in  the  middle 
of  the  screen,  you  must  still  calculate  the  exact  positioning  by  starting  at 
the  top  left  corner  location. 


VERTICAL  POSITIONING 

Setting  up  positions  in  the  horizontal  direction  is  a little  more  difficult 
than  vertical  positioning,  so  well  discuss  vertical  (Y)  positioning  first. 

There  are  200  different  dot  positions  that  can  be  individually  pro- 
grammed onto  your  TV  screen  in  the  Y direction.  The  sprite  Y position 
registers  can  handle  numbers  up  to  255.  This  means  that  you  have  more 


138 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


than  enough  register  locations  to  handle  moving  a sprite  up  and  down. 
You  also  want  to  be  able  to  smoothly  move  a sprite  on  and  off  the 
screen.  More  than  200  values  are  needed  for  this. 

The  first  on-screen  value  from  the  top  of  the  screen,  and  in  the  Y 
direction  for  an  unexpanded  sprite  is  30.  For  a sprite  expanded  in  the  Y 
direction  it  would  be  9.  (Since  each  dot  is  twice  as  tall,  this  makes  a 
certain  amount  of  sense,  as  the  initial  position  is  STILL  calculated  from 
the  top  left  corner  of  the  sprite.) 

The  first  Y value  in  which  a sprite  (expanded  or  not)  is  fully  on  the 
screen  (all  21  possible  lines  displayed)  is  50. 

The  last  Y value  in  which  an  unexpanded  sprite  is  fully  on  the  screen  is 
229.  The  last  Y value  in  which  an  expanded  sprite  is  fully  on  the  screen 
is  208. 

The  first  Y value  in  which  a sprite  is  fully  off  the  screen  is  250. 
EXAMPLE: 


CLR  /HOME 


10  PRINT  "IT  '•  REM 

20  POKE 2 040  .•  13  :REM 

DR TP  FROM  BLOCK  13 

30  FOR I =@T06£ : P0KE832+ I , 1 29 : NEXT : REM 
D FIT  FI  INTO  BLOCK  13  <1 3*64=832 > 

40  V =532 4 8 : REM 

OF  VIDEO  CHIP 

50  POKEV+21,1  : REM 

1 

60  POKEV+39,1  : REM 

COLOR 

70  POKEV+1 ..  100  : REM 

V POSITION 

80  P0KEV+ 1 6 , 0 : POKEV , 1 00  : REM 

X POSITION 


CLEAR  SCREEN 
GET  SPRITE  0 

POKE  SPRITE 

SET  BEGINNING 

ENABLE  SPRITE 

SET  SPRITE  0 

SET  SPRITE  0 

SET  SPRITE  0 


HORIZONTAL  POSITIONING 

Positioning  in  the  horizontal  direction  is  more  complicated  because 
there  are  more  than  256  positions.  This  means  that  an  extra  bit,  or  9th 
bit  is  used  to  control  the  X position.  By  adding  the  extra  bit  when  neces- 
sary a sprite  now  has  512  possible  positions  in  the  left/right,  X,  direc- 
tion. This  makes  more  possible  combinations  than  can  be  seen  on  the 
visible  part  of  the  screen.  Each  sprite  can  have  a position  from  0 to  51 1 . 
However,  only  those  values  between  24  and  343  are  visible  on  the 
screen.  If  the  X position  of  a sprite  is  greater  than  255  (on  the  right  side 
of  the  screen),  the  bit  in  the  X MOST  SIGNIFICANT  BIT  POSITION  register 
must  be  set  to  a 1 (turned  ON).  If  the  X position  of  a sprite  is  less  than 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


139 


Figure  3-3.  Sprite 


140 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


‘North  American  television  transmission  standards  for  your  home  TV. 


Positioning  Charts. 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


141 


North  American  television  transmission  standards  for  your  home  TV. 


256  (on  the  left  side  of  the  screen),  then  the  X MSB  of  that  sprite  must 
be  0 (turned  OFF).  Bits  0 to  7 of  the  X MSB  register  correspond  to  sprites 
0 to  7,  respectively. 

The  following  program  moves  a sprite  across  the  screen: 

EXAMPLE: 


10  PRINT" 

2©  POKE 20 40 13 

30  FOR I =01062 • PGKE832+ I , 1 29 : NEXT 


40  V=53248 
50  PQKEV+2 1 .■  1 
60  POKEV+39,1 
70  P0KEV+ 1,100 
80  FOR J~0T 0347 

•=J0  HX=  I NT  C J/256  > : L X = J - 2 5 6 :M H X 
1 00  POKEV , LX : P0KEV+ 1 6 , HX : NEXT 


When  moving  expanded  sprites  onto  the  left  side  of  the  screen  in  the 
X direction,  you  have  to  start  the  sprite  OFF  SCREEN  on  the  RIGHT  SIDE. 
This  is  because  an  expanded  sprite  is  larger  than  the  amount  of  space 
available  on  the  left  side  of  the  screen. 


EXAMPLE: 


10 

20 


PRINT  "IT 
POKE2840, 13 


CLR/HOME 


30  FOR  I :=0TOS2  : POKES 32+ 1 , 1 29  • NEXT 
40  V =53 24 8 


50  POKEV +21 1 

60  POKEV+39, 1 : POKEV+23, 1 '■ POKEV+29, 1 
70  P0KEV+ 1,100 
80  J—488 

90  HX= I NT  < J/256  > : LX« J-256#HX 
1 00  POKEV , LX : P0KEV+ 1 6 , HX 
110  J=J+1 : I F J>5 1 1 THEN J =0 
1 20  I F J > 4 8 8 0 R J < 3 4 8 0 0 T 0 9 0 


The  charts  in  Figure  3-3  explain  sprite  positioning. 

By  using  these  values,  you  can  position  each  sprite  anywhere.  By  mov- 
ing the  sprite  a single  dot  position  at  a time,  very  smooth  movement  is 
easy  to  achieve. 


142 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


SPRITE  POSITIONING  SUMMARY 


Unexpanded  sprites  are  at  least  partially  visible  in  the  40  column,  by 
25  row  mode  within  the  following  parameters: 


1 < = X < = 343 


30  < = Y < = 249 


In  the  38  column  mode,  the  X parameters  change  to  the  following: 

8 < = X < = 334 


In  the  24  row  mode,  the  Y parameters  change  to  the  following: 
34  < = Y < = 245 


Expanded  sprites  are  at  least  partially  visible  in  the  40  column,  by  25 
row  mode  within  the  following  parameters: 

489  > = X < = 343 

9 > = y < = 249 


In  the  38  column  mode,  the  X parameters  change  to  the  following: 
496  > = X < = 334 


In  the  24  row  mode,  the  Y parameters  change  to  the  following: 
13  < = Y < = 245 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


143 


SPRITE  DISPLAY  PRIORITIES 


Sprites  have  the  ability  to  cross  each  other's  paths,  as  well  as  cross  in 
front  of,  or  behind  other  objects  on  the  screen.  This  can  give  you  a truly 
three  dimensional  effect  for  games. 

Sprite  to  sprite  priority  is  fixed.  That  means  that  sprite  0 has  the  high- 
est priority,  sprite  1 has  the  next  priority,  and  so  on,  until  we  get  to 
sprite  7,  which  has  the  lowest  priority.  In  other  words,  if  sprite  1 and 
sprite  6 are  positioned  so  that  they  cross  each  other,  sprite  1 will  be  in 
front  of  sprite  6. 

So  when  you're  planning  which  sprites  will  appear  to  be  in  the  fore- 
ground of  the  picture,  they  must  be  assigned  lower  sprite  numbers  than 
those  sprites  you  want  to  put  towards  the  back  of  the  scene.  Those 
sprites  will  be  given  higher  sprite  numbers. 


NOTI;:  A "window"  effect  is  possible.  If  a sprite  with  higher  priority  has  "holes"  in  it 
(areas  where  the  dots  are  not  set  to  1 and  thus  turned  ON),  the  sprite  with  the  lower 
priority  wilUhow  through.  This  also  happens  with  sprite  and  background  data. 

Sprite  to  background  priority  is  controllable  by  the  SPRITE-BACK- 
GROUND  priority  register  located  at  53275  ($D01B).  Each  sprite  has  a 
bit  in  this  register.  If  that  bit  is  0,  that  sprite  has  a higher  priority  than 
the  background  on  the  screen.  In  other  words,  the  sprite  appears  in 
front  of  background  data.  If  that  bit  is  a 1,  that  sprite  has  a lower 
priority  than  the  background.  Then  the  sprite  appears  behind  the  back- 
ground data. 

COLLISION  DETECTS 

One  of  the  more  interesting  aspects  of  the  VIC-II  chip  is  its  collision 
detection  abilities.  Collisions  can  be  detected  between  sprites,  or  be- 
tween sprites  and  background  data.  A collision  occurs  when  a non-zero 
part  of  a sprite  overlaps  a non-zero  portion  of  another  sprite  or  char- 
acters  on  the  screen. 


144  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


SPRITE  TO  SPRITE  COLLISIONS 


Sprite  to  sprite  collisions  are  recognized  by  the  computer,  or  flagged, 
in  the  spite  to  sprite  collision  register  at  location  53278  ($D01E  in  HEX)  in 
the  VIC-II  chip  control  register.  Each  sprite  has  a bit  in  this  register.  If 
that  bit  is  a 1,  then  that  sprite  is  involved  in  a collision.  The  bits  in  this 
register  will  remain  set  until  read  (PEEKed).  Once  read,  the  register  is 
automatically  cleared,  so  it  is  a good  idea  to  save  the  value  in  a vari- 
able until  you  are  finished  with  it. 


NOTE:  Collisions  can  take  place  even  when  the  sprites  are  off  screen. 


SPRITE  TO  DATA  COLLISIONS 

Sprite  to  data  collisions  are  detected  in  the  sprite  to  data  collision 
register  at  location  53279  ($D01F  in  HEX)  of  the  VIC-II  chip  control  regis- 
ter. 

Each  sprite  has  a bit  in  this  register.  If  that  bit  is  a 1,  then  that  sprite 
is  involved  in  a collision.  The  bits  in  this  register  remain  set  until  read 
(PEEKed).  Once  read,  the  register  is  automatically  cleared,  so  it  is  a 
good  idea  to  save  the  value  in  a variable  until  you  are  finished  with  it. 


NOTE:  MULTI-COLOR  data  01  is  considered  transparent  for  collisions,  even  though  it 
shows  up  on  the  screen.  When  setting  up  a background  screen,  it  is  a good  idea  to 
make  everything  that  should  not  cause  a collision  01  in  multi-color  mode. 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


145 


10  REM  SPRITE  EXAMPLE  1... 

20  REM  THE  HOT  AIR  BALLOON 

30  VI 0=13*4036 : REM  THIS  IS  WHERE  THE  VIC  REGISTERS 
BEGIN 

35  POKEVIC+21 , 1 : REM  ENABLE  SPRITE  0 

36  POKEV 1 0+33 , 1 4 : REM  SET  BACKGROUND  COLOR  TO  LIGHT 
BLUE 

37  PQKEVIC+23, 1 : REM  EXPAND  SPRITE  0 IN  V 
33  POKEVIC+23, 1 : REM  EXPAND  SPRITE  0 IN  X 
40  PQKE2040, 192 : REM  SET  SPRITE  0'S  POINTER 

180  F'OKEVIC+0, 100: REM  SET  SPRITE  0'S  X POSITION 
190  POKEV I C+ 1 , 1 @0 : REM  SET  SPRITE  0'S  V POSITION 
220  POKEVIC+39, 1 :REM  SET  SPRITE  0'S  COLOR 
250  FORY=0TO63 : REM  BVTE  COUNTER  WITH  SPRITE  LOOP 
300  READA : REM  READ  IN  A BVTE 

310  POKE 1 92*64+ Y, A : REM  STORE  THE  DATA  IN  SPRITE 
AREA 

320  NEXTV : REM  CLOSE  LOOP 
330  DX=1 : DV=1 

340  X=PEEK (VICO REM  LOOK  AT  SPRITE  0'S  X POSITION 
350  V=PEEK ( V I C+  D : REM  LOOK  AT  SPRITE  0'S  V POSITION 
360  IFV=50ORV=208THENDV=-DV : REM  IF  V IS  ON  THE 
EDGE  OF  THE 

370  REM  SCREEN,  THEN  REVERSE  DELTA  V 

380  I FX=24 AND < PEEK  < V I C+ 1 6 ) AND 1 >=0THENDX=-DX : REM  IF 

C;pp  J jp  J g 

390  REM  TOUCHING  THE  LEFT  EDGE  <X=24  AND  THE  MSB 
FOR  SPRITE  0 IS  REVERSE  IT 

400  I FX=40AND < PEEK  C V I C+ 1 6 > AND 1>  = 1 THENDX=-DX : REM  IF 
SPRITE  IS 

410  REM  TOUCHING  THE  RIGHT  EDGE  (X=40  AND  THE  MSB 

FOR  SPRITE  0 IS  O,  REVERSE  IT 

420  I FX=255RNDDX= 1 THENX=~ O S I DE= 1 

430  REM  SWITCH  TO  OTHER  SIDE  OF  THE  SCREEN 

440  I FX=0AHDDX=- 1 THENX=256 : S I BE=0 

450  REM  SWITCH  TO  OTHER  SIDE  OF  THE  SCREEN 

460  X=X+DX : REM  ADD  DELTA  X TO  X 

470  X=XAND255 : REM  MAKE  SURE  X IS  IN  ALLOWED  RANGE 

480  V=V+DY  ••  REM  ADD  DELTA  V TO  V 

485  POKEV I C+ 1 6 , 3 I DE 

490  POKEV IC, X ; REM  PUT  NEW  X VALUE  INTO  SPRITE  0'S 
X POSITION 

510  POKEV I C+ 1 , V : REM  PUT  NEW  V VALUE  INTO  SPRITE 
0'S  V POSITION 
530  GOTO340 

600  REM  *****  SPRITE  DATA  ***** 

610  DATA0, 127,0,1,255, 192,3,255,224,3,231,224 
620  II ATA7 , 2 1 7 , 240 , 7 , 223 , 240 , 7 , 2 1 7 , 240 , 3 , 23 1 , 224 
630  DATA3, 255, 224, 3, 255, 224, 2, 255, 160,1, 127,64 
640  DATA1 , 62, 64,0, 156, 128,0, 156, 128,0,73,0,0,73,0 
650  DATA0, 62, 0,0, 62, 0,0, 62, 0,0, 28, 0,0 


146 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


10  REM  SPRITE  EXAMPLE  2... 

20  REM  THE  HOT  RIR  BALLOON  AGAIN 

38  VIC* 13*4096 :REM  THIS  IS  WHERE  THE  VIC  REGISTERS 
BEGIN 

35  POKEVIC+21  .■  S3 : REM  ENABLE  SPRITES  0 THRU  5 

36  POKEV I C+33 .*  1 4 : REM  SET  BACKGROUND  COLOR  TO  LIGHT 
BLUE 

37  POKEV  I C+23  .•  3 : REM  EXPAND  SPRITES  0 AND  1 IN  V 

38  POKEV  I C+29  .<  3 : REM  EXPAND  SPRITES  0 AND  1 IN  X 
40  POKE2040, 132 : REM  SET  SPRITE  0'S  POINTER 

50  POKE204 1 , 1 S3  : REM  SET  SPRITE  l'S  POINTER 
60  POKE2042, 192-REM  SET  SPRITE  2'S  POINTER 
70  P0KE2043, 193 : REM  SET  SPRITE  3'S  POINTER 
80  POKE2044, 192 : REM  SET  SPRITE  4'S  POINTER 
90  POKE 28 4 5 .•  193:  REM  SET  SPRITE  5'S  POINTER 
100  POKEVIC+4,  30 : REM  SET  SPRITE  2'S  X POSITION 

110  POKEVIC+5.-  58 : REM  SET  SPRITE  2'S  V POSITION 

120  POKEV I C+6 , 65 : REM  SET  SPRITE  3'S  X POSITION 

130  POKEV 1 0+7. « 58 : REM  SET  SPRITE  3'S  V POSITION 

140  POKEV I C+8, 100 : REM  SET  SPRITE  4'S  X POSITION 
150  POKEVIC+9,  58 : REM  SET  SPRITE  4'S  V POSITION 
160  POKEV I C+ 10, 100= REM  SET  SPRITE  5'S  X POSITION 
170  POKEV  I C+ 1 1 .■  5S  • REM  SET  SPRITE  5'S  V POSITION 

,129  El 

175  PRINT"  fa"TAB< 15> "THIS  IS  TWO  HIRES  SPRITES"; 

176  PR I NTTAB < 55 > " ON  TOP  OF  EACH  OTHER" 

180  POKEVIC+0, 100 -REM  SET  SPRITE  0'S  X POSITION 

190  POKEV  I C+ 1 .•  1 00  : REM  SET  SPRITE  0'S  V POSITION 

20©  POKEVIC+2, 100 : REM  SET  SPRITE  l'S  X POSITION 

210  POKEVIC+3, 100 : REM  SET  SPRITE  l'S  V POSITION 

220  POKEV  I C+39  .•  1 : REM  SET  SPRITE  0'S  COLOR 

238  POKEVIC+41 .«  1 ; REM  SET  SPRITE  2'S  COLOR 

240  POKEVIC+4 3.-  1 : REM  SET  SPRITE  4'S  COLOR 

250  POKEVIC+40.* 6 : REM  SET  SPRITE  l'S  COLOR 

260  POKEVIC+4 2.-  6 : REM  SET  SPRITE  3'S  COLOR 

27©  POKEVIC+4 4; 6 : REM  SET  SPRITE  5'S  COLOR 
230  FORX® 1 92T 0 1 93 : REM  THE  START  OF  THE  LOOP  THAT 
DEFINES  THE  SPRITES 

29©  FORV==0TO63 : REM  BVTE  COUNTER  WITH  SPRITE  LOOP 
300  RE AD A : REM  READ  IN  A BVTE 

310  P0KEX#64+V , A : REM  STORE  THE  DATA  IN  SPRITE  AREA 
320  NEXTV  , X : REM  CLOSE  LOOPS 
330  DX® 1 : D V= 1 

340  X® PEEK C VIC) : REM  LOOK  AT  SPRITE  0'S  X POSITION 
350  V«PEEK < V I C+ 1 ) : REM  LOOK  AT  SPRITE  0'S  V POSITION 
360  I FV«50ORV®20STHENDV®— DV : REM  IF  V IS  ON  THE 
EDGE  OF  THE 

370  REM  SCREEN,  THEN  REVERSE  DELTA  V 

380  I FX®24AND  < PEEK  C V I C+ 1 6 ) AND  1 ) ®0THENDX®-DX  : REM  I F 

SPRITE  IS... 

390  REM  TOUCHING  THE  LEFT  EDGE,  THEN  REVERSE  IT 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


147 


400  I FX«40AND < PEEK < V I C+ 1 6 > AND 1 > * 1 THENDX»-DX : REM  I F 
SPRITE  IS... 

410  REM  TOUCHING  THE  RIGHT  EDGE,  THEN  REVERSE  IT 
420  I F X — 2 5 5 R N D D X = 1 THENX-- 1 -SI DE=3 
430  REM  SWITCH  TO  OTHER  SIDE  OF  THE  SCREEN 
440  I FX«0ANDDX=»- 1 THENX-256 : S I DE=© 

450  REM  SWITCH  TO  OTHER  SIDE  OF  THE  SCREEN 


460  X*X+DX  •'  REM  ADD  DELTA  X TO  X 

470  X-XAND255 : REM  MAKE  SURE  X IS  IN  ALLOWED  RANGE 
480  V»V+DV:REM  ADD  DELTA  V TO  V 
435  POKE V I CH- IS,  SIDE 

490  POKEV I C , X : REM  PUT  NEW  X VALUE  INTO  SPRITE  0'S 
X POSITION 

500  POKEV I C+2 , X : REM  PUT  NEW  X VALUE  INTO  SPRITE 
l'S  X POSITION 

510  POKEV I G+ 1 .« V : REM  PUT  NEW  V VALUE  INTO  SPRITE 
0'S  V POSITION 

520  POKEV I C+3 , V : REM  PUT  NEW  V VALUE  INTO  SPRITE 
l'S  V POSITION 


530  GOT 0340 

600  REM  SPRITE  DATA  *mW 

6 1 0 DATA© , 255 , 0 , 3 , 1 53 , 1 92 , 7 , 24 , 224 , 7 , 56 , 224 , 1 4 , 1 26 
1 12, 14, 126, 1 12, 14, 126, 1 12 

620  DAT A 6 , 1 26 , 96 , 7 , 56 , 224 , 7 , 56 , 224 , 1 , 56 , 1 28 , 0 , 1 53 , 
0, 0,  90,  0,  0, 56,  © 

63©  DATA© , 56 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 0 ,0,0 , 0 , 1 26 , 0 , 0 , 42 , © , 0 , 84 , 0 , 0 
40  , © , © 


64©  DATA© , 0 , 0 ,0,1 ©2 , © , © , 23 1 , 0 , 0 , 1 95 , 0 ,1,1 29 , 128,1 , 
129, 128,1, 129, 128 

650  DATA 1 , 129,1 28 , 0 , 1 95 , © ,0,1 95 , © , 4 , 1 95 , 32 , 2 , 1 02 , 
64 , 2 , 36 , 64 , 1 , 0 , 1 28 

66©  DATA 1 , © , 1 28 , 0 , 1 53 , © , © , 1 53 ,0,0 , 0 , 0 , 0 , 84 , 0 , 0 , 42 , 
© , © , 20 , © , 0 


10  REM  SPRITE  EXAMPLE  3... 

20  REM  THE  HOT  AIR  GORF 

30  V I 0-53248 : REM  THIS  IS  WHERE  THE  VIC  REGISTERS 
BEGIN 

35  POKEV I C+2 1 , 1 : REM  ENABLE  SPRITE  © 


148 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


36  F'OKEVIC+33, 14 : REM  SET  BACKGROUND  COLOR  TO  LIGHT 
BLUE 

37  POKEVIC+23, 1 : REM  EXPAND  SPRITE  8 IN  V 

38  POKEVIC+23..  1 : REM  EXPAND  SPRITE  8 IN  X 
48  POKE2040,  132 : REM  SET  SPRITE  0'S  POINTER 
58  POKEVIC+23, 1 ‘REM  TURN  ON  MULTICOLOR 

68  POKEV I C+37 .« 7 : REM  SET  MULTICOLOR  8 

78  POKEVIC+38.-  4 : REM  SET  MULTICOLOR  1 

188  POKEV I C+0, 100: REM  SET  SPRITE  0'S  X POSITION 

130  POKEVIC+1, 100 -REM  SET  SPRITE  0'S  V POSITION 

220  POKEV  I C+33 .•  2 : REM  SET  SPRITE  0'S  COLOR 

230  FGRY=0TO63 : REM  BVTE  COUNTER  WITH  SPRITE  LOOP 

300  READA : REM  READ  IN  A BVTE 

310  POKE 1 2233+ V, A : REM  STORE  THE  DATA  IN  SPRITE  AREA 
320  NEXT  V • REM  CLOSE  LOOP 
338  DX~1 : DV=1 

340  X=PEEK <. V I C > : REM  LOOK  AT  SPRITE  0'S  X POSITION 
350  V-PEEK < V I C+ 1 > : REM  LOOK  AT  SPRITE  0'S  V POSITION 
360  IFV==50ORV=20STHENDV=-DV:REM  IF  V IS  ON  THE 
EDGE  OF  THE- . . 

370  REM  SCREEN,  THEN  REVERSE  DELTA  V 

388  I F XS524AND  < PEEK  < V I C+ 1 6 > AND  1 > =0THENDX=-DX  • REM 

IF  SPRITE  IS... 

338  REM  TOUCHING  THE  LEFT  EDGE,  THEN  REVERSE  IT 
408  I FX-40AND  < PEEK  < V I C+ 1 6 > AND  1 > = 1 THENDX==~DX  : REM  I F 
SPRITE  IS... 

41©  REM  TOUCHING  THE  RIGHT  EDGE,  THEN  REVERSE  IT 

420  I FX=£55ANDDX= 1 THENX=~ 1 = S I BE* 1 

438  REM  SWITCH  TO  OTHER  SIDE  OF  THE  SCREEN 

440  I FX=0ANDDX=~ 1 THENX=256 • S I DE*0 

450  REM  SWITCH  TO  OTHER  SIDE  OF  THE  SCREEN 

460  X=X+DX : REM  ADD  DELTA  X TO  X 

470  X=XAND255 • REM  MAKE  SURE  X IS  IN  ALLOWED  RANGE 
480  V-V+DV : REM  ADD  DELTA  V TO  V 
485  POKEVIC+1 6, SIDE 

430  POKEV I C, X : REM  PUT  NEW  X VALUE  INTO  SPRITE  0'S 
X POSITION 

510  POKEVIC+1, V= REM  PUT  NEW  V VALUE  INTO  SPRITE 
0'S  V POSITION 

520  GETA$ : REM  GET  A KEV  FROM  THE  KEYBOARD 

521  I F A#* " M u THENPOKEV I C+2S , 1 : REM  USER  SELECTED 
MULTICOLOR 

522  I FA$= " H " THENPOKEV I C+28 , 0 : REM  USER  SELECTED 
HIGH  RESOLUTION 

530  GOTO340 

680  REM  i *****  SPRITE  DATA  ***** 

610  DATA64, 0, 1, 16, 170,4,6, 178, 144, 10, 170, 160,42, 

1 70,1 68 , 41,1 05 , 1 ©4 , 1 63 , 235 , 1 06 

620  DATA 1 63 , 235 , 1 06 , 1 63 , 235 , 1 06 , 1 70 , 1 78 , 1 70 , 1 78 , 
170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 170, 170 

630  DATA 1 66 , 1 70 , 1 54 , 1 63 , 85 , 1 06 , 1 78 , 85 , 1 70 , 42 , 1 78 , 
168, 1@, 170, 160, 1,8,64, 1,0,64 
648  DATA5, 0,88,0 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


149 


OTHER  GRAPHICS  FEATURES 

SCREEN  BLANKING 


Bit  4 of  the  VIC-II  control  register  controls  the  screen  blanking  func- 
tion. It  is  found  in  the  control  register  at  location  53265  ($D01 1).  When  it 
is  turned  ON  (in  other  words,  set  to  a 1)  the  screen  is  normal.  When  bit  4 
is  set  to  0 (turned  OFF),  the  entire  screen  changes  to  border  color. 

The  following  POKE  blanks  the  screen.  No  data  is  lost,  it  just  isn't 
displayed. 

POKE  53265, PEE K(53265)AN D 239 

To  bring  back  the  screen,  use  the  POKE  shown  below: 

POKE  53265,PEEK(53265)OR  16 


NOTE:  Turning  off  the  screen  will  speed  up  the  processor  slightly.  This  means  that 
program  RUNning  is  also  sped  up. 


RASTER  REGISTER 

The  raster  register  is  found  in  the  VIC-II  chip  at  location  53266 
($D012).  The  raster  register  is  a dual  purpose  register.  When  you  read 
this  register  it  returns  the  lower  8 bits  of  the  current  raster  position.  The 
raster  position  of  the  most  significant  bit  is  in  register  location  53265 
($D01 1).  You  use  the  raster  register  to  set  up  timing  changes  in  your 
display  so  that  you  can  get  rid  of  screen  flicker.  The  changes  on  your 
screen  should  be  made  when  the  raster  is  not  in  the  visible  display  area, 
which  is  when  your  dot  positions  fall  between  51  and  251. 

When  the  raster  register  is  written  to  (including  the  MSB)  the  number 
written  to  is  saved  for  use  with  the  raster  compare  function.  When  the 
actual  raster  value  becomes  the  same  as  the  number  written  to  the 
raster  register,  a bit  in  the  VIC-II  chip  interrupt  register  53273  ($D019)  is 
turned  ON  by  setting  it  to  1 . 

NOTE:  |f  the  proper  interrupt  bit  is  enabled  (turned  on),  an  interrupt  (IRQ)  will  occur. 


150 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


INTERRUPT  STATUS  REGISTER 


The  interrupt  status  register  shows  the  current  status  of  any  interrupt 
source.  The  current  status  of  bit  2 of  the  interrupt  register  will  be  a 1 
when  two  sprites  hit  each  other.  The  same  is  true,  in  a corresponding  1 
to  1 relationship,  for  bits  0—3  listed  in  the  chart  below.  Bit  7 is  also  set 
with  a 1,  whenever  an  interrupt  occurs. 

The  interrupt  status  register  is  located  at  53273  ($D019)  and  is  as 
follows: 


LATCH  BIT  # DESCRIPTION 


IRST 

0 

Set  when  current  raster  count  = 

stored  raster  count 

IMDC 

1 

Set  by  SPRITE-DATA  collision  (1st 

one  only,  until  reset) 

IMMC 

2 

Set  by  SPRITE-SPRITE  collision  (1st 

one  only,  until  reset) 

ILP 

3 

Set  by  negative  transition  of  light  pen  (1  per  frame) 

IRQ 

7 

Set  by  latch  set  and  enabled 

Once  an  interrupt  bit  has  been  set,  it's  "latched"  in  and  must  be 
cleared  by  writing  a 1 to  that  bit  in  the  interrupt  register  when  you're 
ready  to  handle  it.  This  allows  selective  interrupt  handling,  without  hav- 
ing to  store  the  other  interrupt  bits. 

The  INTERRUPT  ENABLE  REGISTER  is  located  at  53274  ($D01A).  It  has 
the  same  format  as  the  interrupt  status  register.  Unless  the  correspond- 
ing bit  in  the  interrupt  enable  register  is  set  to  a 1 , no  interrupt  from  that 
source  will  take  place.  The  interrupt  status  register  can  still  be  polled  for 
information,  but  no  interrupts  will  be  generated. 

To  enable  an  interrupt  request  the  corresponding  interrupt  enable  bit 
(as  shown  in  the  chart  above)  must  be  set  to  a 1 . 

This  powerful  interrupt  structure  lets  you  use  split  screen  modes.  For 
instance  you  can  have  half  of  the  screen  bit  mapped,  half  text,  more 
than  8 sprites  at  a time,  etc.  The  secret  is  to  use  interrupts  properly.  For 
example,  if  you  want  the  top  half  of  the  screen  to  be  bit  mapped  and 
the  bottom  to  be  text,  just  set  the  raster  compare  register  (as  explained 
previously)  for  halfway  down  the  screen.  When  the  interrupt  occurs,  tell 
the  VIC-II  chip  to  get  characters  from  ROM,  then  set  the  raster  compare 
register  to  interrupt  at  the  top  of  the  screen.  When  the  interrupt  occurs 
at  the  top  of  the  screen,  tell  the  VIC-II  chip  to  get  characters  from  RAM 
(bit  map  mode). 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


151 


You  can  also  display  more  than  8 sprites  in  the  same  way.  Unfortu- 
nately BASIC  isn't  fast  enough  to  do  this  very  well.  So  if  you  want  to  start 
using  display  interrupts,  you  should  work  in  machine  language. 

SUGGESTED  SCREEN  AND  CHARACTER 
COLOR  COMBINATIONS 

Color  TV  sets  are  limited  in  their  ability  to  place  certain  colors  next  to 
each  other  on  the  same  line.  Certain  combinations  of  screen  and  char- 
acter colors  produce  blurred  images.  This  chart  shows  which  color  com- 
binations to  avoid,  and  which  work  especially  well  together. 


G c 
O 

_J 

O 

o 

z 

111 

LU 

DC 

o 

C/) 


CHARACTER  COLOR 


0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

0 

X 

• 

X 

• 

• 

• 

X 

• 

• 

X 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

1 

• 

X 

• 

X 

2 

X 

• 

X 

X 

• 

X 

X 

• 

• 

X 

• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

• 

3 

• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

• 

• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

• 

X 

X 

• 

X 

4 

• 

• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

• 

5 

• 

• 

X 

• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

• 

X 

• 

X 

• 

6 

• 

• 

X 

• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

• 

• 

• 

7 

• 

X 

• 

X 

X 

X 

• 

X 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

X 

X 

X 

8 

• 

• 

• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

• 

X 

• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

• 

9 

X 

• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

• 

• 

X 

• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

• 

10 

• 

• 

• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

• 

X 

• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

• 

11 

• 

• 

X 

• 

X 

X 

X 

• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

• 

• 

• 

• 

12 

• 

• 

• 

X 

X 

X 

• 

X 

X 

• 

X 

• 

X 

X 

X 

• 

13 

• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

• 

• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

14 

• 

• 

X 

• 

X 

X 

• 

X 

X 

X 

X 

• 

X 

X 

X 

• 

15 

• 

• 

• 

X 

• 

• 

• 

X 

X 

• 

• 

• 

• 

X 

• 

X 

• = EXCELLENT 

• = FAIR 
X « POOR 


152 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


PROGRAMMING  SPRITES— ANOTHER  LOOK 

For  those  of  you  having  trouble  with  graphics,  this  section  has  been 
designed  as  a more  elementary  tutorial  approach  to  sprites. 

MAKING  SPRITES  IN  BASIC— A SHORT  PROGRAM 

There  are  at  least  three  different  BASIC  programming  techniques 
which  let  you  create  graphic  images  and  cartoon  animations  on  the 
Commodore  64.  You  can  use  the  computer's  built-in  graphics  character 
set  (see  Page  376).  You  can  program  your  own  characters  (see  Page 
108)  or  . . . best  of  all  . . . you  can  use  the  computer's  built-in  "sprite 
graphics."  To  illustrate  how  easy  it  is,  here's  one  of  the  shortest 
spritemaking  programs  you  can  write  in  BASIC: 


CLR/HOME 


10  PR  I NT  "IT 
20  POKE2040, 13 

30  F0RS~832T0832+S2 : POKES , 255 : NEXT 

40  V«53243 

50  POKE V+2 1,1 

60  POKEV+39  .<  1 

70  F'OKEV  .•  24 

80  P0KEV+ 1 t 1 0© 

This  program  includes  the  key  "ingredients"  you  need  to  create  any 
sprite.  The  POKE  numbers  come  from  the  SPRITEMAKING  CHART  on 
Page  176.  This  program  defines  the  first  sprite  . . . sprite  0 ...  as  a 
solid  white  square  on  the  screen.  Here's  a line-by-line  explanation  of  the 
program: 

LINE  10  clears  the  screen. 

LINE  20  sets  the  "sprite  pointer"  to  where  the  Commodore  64  will 
read  its  sprite  data  from.  Sprite  0 is  set  at  2040,  sprite  1 at  2041,  sprite 
2 at  2042,  and  so  on  up  to  sprite  7 at  2047.  You  can  set  all  8 sprite 
pointers  to  13  by  using  this  line  in  place  of  line  20: 

20  FOR  SP=2040T02047:POKE  SP,13:NEXT  SP 

LINE  30  puts  the  first  sprite  (sprite  0)  into  63  bytes  of  the  Commodore 
64's  RAM  memory  starting  at  location  832  (each  sprite  requires  63  bytes 
of  memory).  The  first  sprite  (sprite  0)  is  "addressed"  at  memory  locations 
832  to  894. 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


153 


LINE  40  sets  the  variable  yyVyy  equal  to  53248,  the  starting  address  of 
the  VIDEO  CHIP.  This  entry  lets  us  use  the  form  (V  + number)  for  sprite 
settings.  Weyre  using  the  form  (V  + number)  when  POKEing  sprite  settings 
because  this  format  conserves  memory  and  lets  us  work  with  smaller 
numbers.  For  example,  in  line  50  we  typed  POKE  V+21 . This  is  the  same 
as  typing  POKE  53248  + 21  or  POKE  53269  ...  but  V+21  requires  less 
space  than  53269,  and  is  easier  to  remember. 

LINE  50  enables  or  "turns  on"  sprite  0.  There  are  8 sprites,  numbered 
from  0 to  7.  To  turn  on  an  individual  sprite,  or  a combination  of  sprites, 
all  you  have  to  do  is  POKE  V+21  followed  by  a number  from  0 (turn  all 
sprites  off)  to  255  (turn  all  8 sprites  on).  You  can  turn  on  one  or  more 
sprites  by  POKEing  the  following  numbers: 


ALL  ON 

SPRITE0 

SPRITE  1 

SPRITE2 

SPRITE  3 

SPRITE4 

SPRITE5 

SPRITE6 

SPRITE7 

ALL  OFF 

V+21 ,255 

V+21,1 

V+21, 2 

V+21, 4 

V+21, 8 

V+21, 16 

V+21, 32 

V+21, 64 

V+21, 128 

V+21,0 

POKE  V + 21 ,1  turns  on  sprite  0.  POKE  V + 21, 128  turns  on  sprite  7.  You 
can  also  turn  on  combinations  of  sprites.  For  example,  POKE  V + 21, 129 
turns  on  both  sprite  0 and  sprite  7 by  adding  the  two  yyturn  onyy  numbers 
(1  + 128)  together.  (See  SPRITEMAKING  CHART,  Page  176.) 


LINE  60  sets  the  COLOR  of  sprite  0.  There  are  16  possible  sprite 
colors,  numbered  from  0 (black)  to  15  (grey).  Each  sprite  requires  a 
different  POKE  to  set  its  color,  from  V + 39  to  V + 46.  POKE  V+39,1 


colors  sprite  0 white.  POKE  V + 46, 15  colors  sprite  7 grey.  (See  the 
SPRITEMAKING  CHART  for  more  information.) 

When  you  create  a sprite,  as  you  just  did,  the  sprite  will  STAY  IN 
MEMORY  until  you  POKE  it  off,  redefine  it,  or  turn  off  your  computer. 
This  lets  you  change  the  color,  position  and  even  shape  of  the  sprite  in 
DIRECT  or  IMMEDIATE  mode,  which  is  useful  for  editing  purposes.  As  an 
example,  RUN  the  program  above,  then  type  this  line  in  DIRECT  mode 
(without  a line  number)  and  hit  the  key: 


POKE  V+39,8 


The  sprite  on  the  screen  is  now  ORANGE.  Try  POKEing  some  other  num- 
bers from  0 to  1 5 to  see  the  other  sprite  colors.  Because  you  did  this  in 
DIRECT  mode,  if  you  RUN  your  program  the  sprite  will  return  to  its  origi- 
nal color  (white). 


154 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


LINE  70  determines  the  HORIZONTAL  or  "X"  POSITION  of  the  sprite 
on  the  screen.  This  number  represents  the  location  of  the  UPPER  LEFT 
CORNER  of  the  sprite.  The  farthest  left  horizontal  (X)  position  which  you 
can  see  on  your  television  screen  is  position  number  24,  although  you 
can  move  the  sprite  OFF  THE  SCREEN  to  position  number  0. 


LINE  80  determines  the  VERTICAL  or  //Y//  POSITION  of  the  sprite,  in 
this  program,  we  placed  the  sprite  at  X (horizontal)  position  24,  and  Y 
(vertical)  position  100.  To  try  another  location,  type  this  POKE  in  DIRECT 


mode  and  hit 


RETURN 


POKE  V,24:POKE  V+1,50 


This  places  the  sprite  at  the  upper  left  corner  of  the  screen.  To  move  the 
sprite  to  the  lower  left  corner,  type  this: 

POKE  V,24:POKE  V+ 1,229 


Each  number  from  832  to  895  in  our  sprite  0 address  represents  one 
block  of  8 pixels,  with  three  8-pixel  blocks  in  each  horizontal  row  of  the 
sprite.  The  loop  in  line  80  tells  the  computer  to  POKE  832,255  which 
makes  the  first  8 pixels  solid  . . . then  POKE  833,255  to  make  the  second 
8 pixels  solid,  and  so  on  to  location  894  which  is  the  last  group  of  8 
pixels  in  the  bottom  right  corner  of  the  sprite.  To  better  see  how  this 
works,  try  typing  the  following  in  DIRECT  mode,  and  notice  that  the 
second  group  of  8 pixels  is  erased: 

POKE  833,0  (to  put  it  back  type  POKE  833,255  or  RUN  your  program) 

The  following  line,  which  you  can  add  to  your  program,  erases  the 
blocks  in  the  MIDDLE  of  the  sprite  you  created: 

90  FOR  A=836  TO  891  STEP  3:POKE  A,0:NEXT  A 

Remember,  the  pixels  that  make  up  the  sprite  are  grouped  in  blocks  of 
eight.  This  line  erases  the  5th  group  of  eight  pixels  (block  836)  and  every 
third  block  up  to  block  890.  Try  POKEing  any  of  the  other  numbers  from 
832  to  894  with  either  a 255  to  make  them  solid  or  0 to  make  them 
blank. 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


155 


CRUNCHING  YOUR  SPRITE  PROGRAMS 


Here  s a helpful  "crunching"  tip:  The  program  described  above  is  already  short,  but  it 
can  be  made  even  shorter  by  "crunching"  it  smaller.  In  our  example  we  list  the  key 
sprite  settings  on  separate  program  lines  so  you  can  see  what's  happening  in  the 
program.  In  actual  practice,  a good  programmer  would  probably  write  this  program 
as  a TWO  LINE  PROGRAM  ...  by  "crunching"  it  as  follows: 

10PRINTCHR$(147):V=53248:POKEV+21/1:POKE2040  13- 

POKEV+39,1 

20FORS=832TO894:POKES,255:NEXT:POKEV,24:POKEV+l,100 

For  more  tips  on  how  to  crunch  your  programs  so  they  fit  in  less  memory  and  run  more 
efficiently,  see  the  "crunching  guide"  on  Page  24. 


TV  SCREEN 


6 

==*= 

— 

r^N. 

r 

Lx 

POSITION  - HORIZONTAL 

=d 

J 

t. 

— i 

C 

. V 

2 

c 

U 

c 

u 

1 

II 

h 

X 

r 

5 

h 

a 

5 ■ 

/ 

r~ 

C 

Q 

) 

/ 

> 

r 

t 

A Sprite  located  here  must  have  both  its 
X-position  (horizontal)  and  Y-position  (vertical) 
set  so  it  can  be  displayed  on  the  screen. 

Figure  3-4.  The  display  screen  is  divided  into  a grid  of  X and  Y coor- 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


POSITIONING  SPRITES  ON  THE  SCREEN 


The  entire  display  screen  is  divided  into  a grid  of  X and  Y coordi- 
nates, like  a graph.  The  X COORDINATE  is  the  HORIZONTAL  position 
across  the  screen  and  the  Y COORDINATE  is  the  VERTICAL  position  up 
and  down  (see  Figure  3-4). 

To  position  any  sprite  on  the  screen,  you  must  POKE  TWO  SETTINGS 
. . . the  X position  and  the  Y position  . . . these  tell  the  computer  where 
to  display  the  UPPER  LEFT  HAND  CORNER  of  the  sprite.  Remember  that 
a sprite  consists  of  504  individual  pixels,  24  across  by  21  down  ...  so  if 
you  POKE  a sprite  onto  the  upper  left  corner  of  your  screen,  the  sprite 
will  be  displayed  as  a graphic  image  24  pixels  ACROSS  and  21  pixels 
DOWN  starting  at  the  X-Y  position  you  defined.  The  sprite  will  be  dis- 
played based  on  the  upper  left  corner  of  the  entire  sprite,  even  if  you 
define  the  sprite  using  only  a small  part  of  the  24X21 -pixel  sprite  area. 

To  understand  how  X-Y  positioning  works,  study  the  following  dia- 
gram (Figure  3-5),  which  shows  the  X and  Y numbers  in  relation  to  your 
display  screen.  Note  that  the  GREY  AREA  in  the  diagram  shows  your 
television  viewing  area  . . . the  white  area  represents  positions  which 
are  OFF  your  viewing  screen  . . . 


X POSITIONS  RUN  FROM  0 TO  255, 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


157 


To  display  a sprite  in  a given  location,  you  must  POKE  the  X and  Y 
settings  for  each  SPRITE  . . . remembering  that  every  sprite  has  its  own 
unique  X POKE  and  Y POKE.  The  X and  Y settings  for  all  8 sprites  are 
shown  here: 

POKE  THESE  VALUES  TO  SET  X-Y  SPRITE  POSITIONS 


SPRITEO 

SPRITE1 

SPRITE2 

SPRITE3 

SPRITE4 

SPRITE5 

SPRITE6 

SPRITE7 

SET  X 

V,x 

V+2,X 

V+4,X 

V+6,X 

V+8,X 

V+10,X 

V+12,X 

V+14,X 

SET  Y 

V+ 1 ,Y 

V+3,Y 

V+5,Y 

V+7,Y 

V + 9,Y 

V+ 1 1 ,Y 

V+13,Y 

V+15,Y 

RIGHTX 

V+16, 1 

V+16,2 

V+16,4 

V+16,8 

V+16, 16 

V+16,32 

V+ 16,64 

V+16, 128 

POKEING  AN  X POSITION:  The  possible  values  of  X are  0 to  255, 
counting  from  left  to  right.  Values  0 to  23  place  all  or  part  of  the  sprite 
OUT  OF  THE  VIEWING  AREA  off  the  left  side  of  the  screen  . . . values  24 
to  255  place  the  sprite  IN  THE  VIEWING  AREA  up  to  the  255th  position 
(see  next  paragraph  for  settings  beyond  the  255th  X position).  To  place 
the  sprite  at  one  of  these  positions,  just  type  the  X-POSITION  POKE  for 
the  sprite  you're  using.  For  example,  to  POKE  sprite  1 at  the  farthest  left 
X position  IN  THE  VIEWING  AREA,  type:  POKE  V+2,24. 

X VALUES  BEYOND  THE  255TH  POSITION:  To  get  beyond  the  255th 
position  across  the  screen,  you  need  to  make  a SECOND  POKE  using  the 
numbers  in  the  "RIGHT  X"  row  of  the  chart  (Figure  3-5).  Normally,  the 
horizontal  (X)  numbering  would  continue  past  the  255th  position  to  256, 
257,  etc.,  but  because  registers  only  contain  8 bits  we  must  use  a "sec- 
ond register  to  access  the  RIGHT  SIDE  of  the  screen  and  start  our  X 
numbering  over  again  at  0.  So  to  get  beyond  X position  255,  you  must 
POKE  V+16  and  a number  (depending  on  the  sprite).  This  gives  you  65 
additional  X positions  (renumbered  from  0 to  65)  in  the  viewing  area  on 
the  RIGHT  side  of  the  viewing  screen.  (You  can  actually  POKE  the  right 
side  X value  as  high  as  255,  which  takes  you  off  the  right  edge  of  the 
viewing  screen.) 

POKEING  A Y POSITION:The  possible  values  of  Y are  0 to  255,  count- 
ing from  top  to  bottom.  Values  0 to  49  place  all  or  part  of  the  sprite  OUT 
OF  THE  VIEWING  AREA  off  the  TOP  of  the  screen.  Values  50  to  229  place 
the  sprite  IN  THE  VIEWING  AREA.  Values  230  to  255  place  all  or  part  of 
the  sprite  OUT  OF  THE  VIEWING  AREA  off  the  BOTTOM  of  the  screen. 


158  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


Let's  see  how  this  X-Y  positioning  works,  using  sprite  1.  Type  this  pro- 
gram: 

1 0 PR  I NT  " : V =53248  : POKE  V +2 1 ..  2 : POKE204 1 .■  1 3 : 

F 0 R S * S 3 2 T 0 S 9 5 : POKES..  255  : NEXT 
20  POKE V+ 40;-  7 
30  POKEV+2 ..  24 
40  POKEV+3,50 

This  simple  program  establishes  sprite  1 as  a solid  box  and  positions  it 
at  the  upper  left  corner  of  the  screen.  Now  change  line  40  to  read: 

40  POKE  V+3,229 

This  moves  the  sprite  to  the  bottom  left  corner  of  the  screen.  Now  let's 
test  the  RIGHT  X LIMIT  of  the  sprite.  Change  line  30  as  shown: 

30  POKE  V+2,255 

This  moves  the  sprite  to  the  RIGHT  but  reaches  the  RIGHT  X LIMIT,  which 
is  255.  At  this  point,  the  "most  significant  bit"  in  register  16  must  be  SET. 
In  other  words,  you  must  type  POKE  V+16  and  the  number  shown  in  the 
"RIGHT  X"  column  in  the  X-Y  POKE  CHART  above  to  RESTART  the  X 
position  counter  at  the  256th  pixel/position  on  the  screen.  Change  line  30 
as  follows: 

30  POKE  V+16,  PEEK(V+16)OR  2:POKE  V+2,0 

POKE  V+16,2  sets  the  most  significant  bit  of  the  X position  for  sprite  1 
and  restarts  it  at  the  256th  pixel/position  on  the  screen.  POKE  V+2,0 
displays  the  sprite  at  the  NEW  POSITION  ZERO,  which  is  now  reset  to  the 
256th  pixel. 

To  get  back  to  the  left  side  of  the  screen , you  must  reset  the  most 
significant  bit  of  the  X position  counter  to  0 by  typing  (for  sprite  1): 

POKE  V+16,  PEE K(V  + 1 6)AN D 253 

TO  SUMMARIZE  how  the  X positioning  works  . . . POKE  the  X POSI- 
TION for  any  sprite  with  a number  from  0 to  255.  To  access  a position 
beyond  the  255th  position/pixel  across  the  screen,  you  must  use  an  ad- 
ditional POKE  (V+16)  which  sets  the  most  significant  bit  of  the  X position 
and  start  counting  from  0 again  at  the  256th  pixel  across  the  screen. 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


159 


This  POKE  starts  the  X numbering  over  again  from  0 at  the  256th  posi- 
tion (Example:  POKE  V+16,  PEEK(V+16)OR  1 and  POKE  V,1  must  be 
included  to  place  sprite  0 at  the  257th  pixel  across  the  screen.)  To  get 
back  to  the  left  side  X positions  you  have  to  TURN  OFF  the  control  setting 
by  typing  POKE  V+16,  PEEK(V+ 1 6)AND  254. 

POSITIONING  MULTIPLE  SPRITES  ON  THE  SCREEN 

Here's  a program  which  defines  THREE  DIFFERENT  SPRITES  (0,  1,  and 
2)  in  different  colors  and  places  them  in  different  positions  on  the 
screen: 


10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

70 


PRINT" 0"  : V-53248  : F0RSss832T0895  : POKES..  255  : NEXT 
F 0 R M ~ 2 0 4 0 T 0 2 042 : POKEM, 13 ? NEXT 


PGKEV+2 1 ••  7 


POKE V+39  f 1 : POKE V+40 7 : POKEV+41 , 8 
POKEV..  24  : POKEV+1 ..  50 
POKEV+2 12  : POKEV+3,  229 
POKEV +4 ..  255  : POKEV+5,  50 


For  convenience,  all  3 sprites  have  been  defined  as  solid  squares, 
getting  their  data  from  the  same  place.  The  important  lesson  here  is 
how  the  3 sprites  are  positioned.  The  white  sprite  0 is  at  the  top  lefthand 
corner.  The  yellow  sprite  1 is  at  the  bottom  lefthand  corner  but  HALF  the 
sprite  is  OFF  THE  SCREEN  (remember,  24  is  the  leftmost  X position  in  the 
viewing  area  ...  an  X position  less  than  24  puts  all  or  part  of  the  sprite 
off  the  screen  and  we  used  an  X position  12  here  which  put  the  sprite 
halfway  off  the  screen).  Finally,  the  orange  sprite  2 is  at  the  RIGHT  X 
LIMIT  (position  255)  . . . but  what  if  you  want  to  display  a sprite  in  the 
area  to  the  RIGHT  of  X position  255? 

DISPLAYING  A SPRITE  BEYOND  THE  255TH  X-POSITION 

Displaying  a sprite  beyond  the  255th  X position  requires  a special 
POKE  which  SETS  the  most  significant  bit  of  the  X position  and  starts  over 
at  the  256th  pixel  position  across  the  screen.  Here's  how  it  works  . . . 

First,  you  POKE  V+16  with  the  number  for  the  sprite  you're  using 
(check  the  "RIGHT  X"  row  in  the  X-Y  chart  . . . we'll  use  sprite  0).  Now 
we  assign  an  X position,  keeping  in  mind  that  the  X counter  starts  over 
from  0 at  the  256th  position  on  the  screen.  Change  line  50  to  read  as 
follows: 

50  POKE  V+16, 1 :POKE  V,24:POKE  V+1,75 


160 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


This  line  POKEs  V+16  with  the  number  required  to  "open  up"  the  right 
side  of  the  screen.  . .the  new  X position  24  for  sprite  0 now  begins  24 
pixels  to  the  RIGHT  of  position  255.  To  check  the  right  edge  of  the 
screen,  change  line  60  to: 

60  POKE  V+16, 1 :POKE  V,65:POKE  V+1,75 

Some  experimentation  with  the  settings  in  the  sprite  chart  will  give  you 
the  settings  you  need  to  position  and  move  sprites  on  the  left  and  right 
sides  of  the  screen.  The  section  on  "moving  sprites"  will  also  increase 
your  understanding  of  how  sprite  positioning  works. 

SPRITE  PRIORITIES 

You  can  actually  make  different  sprites  seem  to  move  IN  FRONT  OF  or 
BEHIND  each  other  on  the  screen.  This  incredible  three  dimensional  illu- 
sion is  achieved  by  the  built-in  SPRITE  PRIORITIES  which  determine  which 
sprites  have  priority  over  the  others  when  2 or  more  sprites  OVERLAP  on 
the  screen. 

The  rule  is  "first  come,  first  served"  which  means  lower-numbered 
sprites  AUTOMATICALLY  have  priority  over  higher-numbered  sprites.  For 
example,  if  you  display  sprite  0 and  sprite  1 so  they  overlap  on  the 
screen,  sprite  0 will  appear  to  be  IN  FRONT  OF  sprite  1.  Actually,  sprite 
0 always  supersedes  all  the  other  sprites  because  it's  the  lowest  num- 
bered sprite.  In  comparison,  sprite  1 has  priority  over  sprites  2-7;  sprite 
2 has  priority  over  sprites  3 — 7,  etc.  Sprite  7 (the  last  sprite)  has  LESS 
PRIORITY  than  any  of  the  other  sprites,  and  will  always  appear  to  be 
displayed  "BEHIND"  any  other  sprites  which  overlap  its  position. 

To  illustrate  how  priorities  work,  change  lines  50,  60,  and  70  in  the 
program  above  to  the  following: 


CLR  /HOME 


1 0 PR  :c  NT  ” □"  : V =53248  = F0RS=832T0895  : POKES , 255  : NEXT 
20  F 0 R M = 2 0 4 0 T 0 2 0 4 2 : P0KEI1,  13  : NEXT 
30  POKEV+21,7 

40  POKEV+39,  1 : PQKEV+40  * 7 : POKEV+41 , 8 
50  POKEV , 24 : P0KEV+ 1 , 50 : P0KEV+ 16,0 
60  POKE V+2 , 34 : PQKEV+3 , 60 
70  POKEV +4 , 44 : POKEV+5 , 70 

You  should  see  a white  sprite  on  top  of  a yellow  sprite  on  top  of  an 
orange  sprite.  Of  course,  now  that  you  see  how  priorities  work,  you  can 
also  MOVE  SPRITES  and  take  advantage  of  these  priorities  in  your  ani- 
mation. 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


161 


DRAWING  A SPRITE 


Drawing  a Commodore  sprite  is  like  coloring  the  empty  spaces  in  a 
coloring  book.  Every  sprite  consists  of  tiny  dots  called  pixels.  To  draw  a 
sprite,  all  you  have  to  do  is  "color  in"  some  of  the  pixels. 

Look  at  the  spritemaking  grid  in  Figure  3-6.  This  is  what  a blank  sprite 
looks  like: 


1 1 1 

2631  2631  2631 


Figure  3-6.  Spritemaking  grid. 


Each  little  "square"  represents  one  pixel  in  the  sprite.  There  are  24  pixels 
across  and  21  pixels  up  and  down,  or  504  pixels  in  the  entire  sprite.  To 
make  the  sprite  look  like  something,  you  have  to  color  in  these  pixels 
using  a special  PROGRAM  ...  but  how  can  you  control  over  500  indi- 
vidual pixels?  That's  where  computer  programming  can  help  you.  In- 
stead of  typing  504  separate  numbers,  you  only  have  to  type  63  num- 
bers for  each  sprite.  Here's  how  it  works  . . . 


162  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


CREATING  A SPRITE  . . . STEP  BY  STEP 


To  make  this  as  easy  as  possible  for  you,  we've  put  together  this 
simple  step  by  step  guide  to  help  you  draw  your  own  sprites. 

STEP  1: 

Write  the  spritemaking  program  shown  here  ON  A PIECE  OF  PAPER  . . . 
note  that  line  100  starts  a special  DATA  section  of  your  program  which 
will  contain  the  63  numbers  you  need  to  create  your  sprite. 


1 0 PR  I NT  " 71"  ■ PQKE53280 , 5 •'  P0KE5328 1 , 6 
20  Vs=53248  : POKEV+34,  3 
30  P0KE532S3, 4 : POKE2042, 13 
40  F0RH=0TO62 : RERBQ : P0KES32+N , Q : NEXT 


100 

101 

102 

103 

104 

105 

106 

107 

108 
103 
110 
111 
112 

113 

114 

115 

116 

117 

118 
113 
120 
200 


HfiTfi  123,0,  1- 
HRTR 128,0, 1- 
URTfl 128,0, 1- 
DflTfl  14.4,0,  1- 
riRTfi  144,0,  1- 
DRTR 144,0, 1- 
IIRTR144, 0,  1 _ 
DRTR 144,0, 1- 
DRTR 144,0, 1- 
IIRTR  144,0,  1- 
IiRTfl  144,0,  1- 
IiRTR  144,0,  1- 
IiRTR  144,0,  1- 
HRTR 128,0, 1- 
DRTR 128,0, 1- 
URTR 128,0, 1- 
IiRTR  128,0,  1- 
DRTR 128,0, 1- 
DRTR 128,0, 1- 


1,255-* 

128 

1 

64 

32 

16 

8 

4 

2 

1 

128 

64 

32 

16 

8 

4 

2 

1 

— 

- 

i,255  — 

” 

in 

Xs5 200 : V~  1 00  : P0KE53252,  X : P0KE53253,  V 


STEP  2: 

Color  in  the  pixels  on  the  spritemaking  grid  on  Page  162  (or  use  a piece 
of  graph  paper  . . . remember,  a sprite  has  24  squares  across  and  21 
squares  down).  We  suggest  you  use  a pencil  and  draw  lightly  so  you  can 
reuse  this  grid.  You  can  create  any  image  you  like,  but  for  our  example 
well  draw  a simple  box. 

STEP  3: 

Look  at  the  first  EIGHT  pixels.  Each  column  of  pixels  has  a number  (128, 
64,  32,  16,  8,  4,  2,  1).  The  special  type  of  addition  we  are  going  to 
show  you  is  a type  of  BINARY  ARITHMETIC  which  is  used  by  most  com- 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


163 


puters  as  a special  way  of  counting.  Here's  a close-up  view  of  the  first 
eight  pixels  in  the  top  left  hand  corner  of  the  sprite: 


128 

64 

32 

16 

8 

4 

2 

1 

■ ■ 

. 

STEP  4: 

Add  up  the  numbers  of  the  SOLID  pixels.  This  first  group  of  eight  pixels 
is  completely  solid,  so  the  total  number  is  255. 

STEP  5: 

Enter  that  number  as  the  FIRST  DATA  STATEMENT  in  line  100  of  the 
Spritemaking  Program  below.  Enter  255  for  the  second  and  third  groups 
of  eight. 

STEP  6: 

Look  at  the  FIRST  EIGHT  PIXELS  IN  THE  SECOND  ROW  of  the  sprite.  Add 
up  the  values  of  the  solid  pixels.  Since  only  one  of  these  pixels  is  solid, 
the  total  value  is  128.  Enter  this  as  the  first  DATA  number  in  line  101. 


128 

64 

32 

16 

8 

4 

2 

1 

STEP  7: 

Add  up  the  values  of  the  next  group  of  eight  pixels  (which  is  0 because 
they  re  all  BLANK)  and  enter  in  line  101.  Now  move  to  the  next  group  of 
pixels  and  repeat  the  process  for  each  GROUP  OF  EIGHT  PIXELS  (there 
are  3 groups  across  each  row,  and  21  rows).  This  will  give  you  a total  of 
63  numbers.  Each  number  represents  ONE  group  of  8 pixels,  and  63 
groups  of  eight  equals  504  total  individual  pixels.  Perhaps  a better  way 
of  looking  at  the  program  is  like  this  . . . each  line  in  the  program 
represents  ONE  ROW  in  the  sprite.  Each  of  the  3 numbers  in  each  row 
represents  ONE  GROUP  OF  EIGHT  PIXELS.  And  each  number  tells  the 
computer  which  pixels  to  make  SOLID  and  which  pixels  to  leave  blank. 


164  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


STEP  8: 


CRUNCH  YOUR  PROGRAM  INTO  A SMALLER  SPACE  BY  RUNNING  TO- 
GETHER ALL  THE  DATA  STATEMENTS,  AS  SHOWN  IN  THE  SAMPLE  PRO- 
GRAM BELOW.  Note  that  we  asked  you  to  write  your  sprite  program  on 
a piece  of  paper.  We  did  this  for  a good  reason.  The  DATA  STATEMENT 
LINES  100—120  in  the  program  in  STEP  1 are  only  there  to  help  you  see 
which  numbers  relate  to  which  groups  of  pixels  in  your  sprite.  Your  final 
program  should  be  "crunched"  like  this: 


CLR/HOME 


1 0 PR I NT " IT  : P0KE532S0 , 5 : P0KE5328 1 , 6 
20  V=53248 : POKEV+34 , 3 
30  P0KE53269  .•  4 : P0KE2842,  13 
40  F0RH-0TO62 : REflDQ • P0KE832+N, Q : NEXT 

1 00  HRTR255 , 255 , 255 , 1 23 , 0 ,1,1 28 ,0,1,1 28 ,0,1,1 44 , 0 , 

1. 144. 0. 1. 144.0. 1. 144.0,  1 

101  DATA 1 44 , 0 , 1, 144,0,1, 144,0,1, 144,0, 1, 144,0,1, 

144.0. 1. 128.0.1. 128.0. 1 

1 02  DATA 1 28 ,0,1,1 28 , 0 ,1,1 28 ,0,1,1 28 , 8 , 1 , 255 , 255 , 255 
200  X«200 : V= 1 00 : POKES 32 52 , X : P0KE53253 , V 

MOVING  YOUR  SPRITE  ON  THE  SCREEN 

Now  that  you've  created  your  sprite,  let's  do  some  interesting  things 
with  it.  To  move  your  sprite  smoothly  across  the  screen,  add  these  two 
lines  to  your  program: 

50  POKE  V+5,100:FOR  X=24T0255:P0KE  V+4,X:NEXT:POKE 
V+16,4 

55  FOR  X=0TO65:POKE  V+4,X:NEXT  X:POKE  V+16,0:GOTO  50 

LINE  50  POKEs  the  Y POSITION  at  100  (try  50  or  229  instead  for 
variety).  Then  it  sets  up  a FOR  . . . NEXT  loop  which  POKEs  the  sprite 
into  X position  0 to  X position  255,  in  order.  When  it  reaches  the  255th 
position,  it  POKEs  the  RIGHT  X POSITION  (POKE  V+16,4)  which  is  re- 
quired to  cross  to  the  right  side  of  the  screen. 

LINE  55  has  a FOR  . . . NEXT  loop  which  continues  to  POKE  the  sprite 
in  the  last  65  positions  on  the  screen.  Note  that  the  X value  was  reset  to 
zero  but  because  you  used  the  RIGHT  X setting  (POKE  V+16,2)  X starts 
over  on  the  right  side  of  the  screen. 

This  line  keeps  going  back  to  itself  (GOTO  50).  If  you  just  want  the 
sprite  to  move  ONCE  across  the  screen  and  disappear,  then  take  out 
GOTO50. 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


165 


Here's  a line  which  moves  the  sprite  BACK  AND  FORTH: 


50  POKE  V + 5, 1 00:FOR  X = 24T0255:P0KE  V+4,X:NEXT:  POKE 
V+16,4:FOR  X=0TO65:  POKE  V+4,X:  NEXT  X 
55  FOR  X=65TOO  STEP-l:POKE  V+4,X:NEXT:POKE  V+16,0:  FOR 
X=255T024  STEP-1:  POKE  V+4,X.NEXT 
60  GOTO  50 


Do  you  see  how  these  programs  work?  This  program  is  the  same  as  the 
previous  one,  except  when  it  reaches  the  end  of  the  right  side  of  the 
screen,  it  REVERSES  ITSELF  and  goes  back  in  the  other  direction.  That  is 
what  the  STEP-1  accomplishes  ...  it  tells  the  program  to  POKE  the 
sprite  into  X values  from  65  to  0 on  the  right  side  of  the  screen,  then 
from  255  to  0 on  the  left  side  of  the  screen,  STEPping  backwards 
minus— 1 position  at  a time. 


VERTICAL  SCROLLING 


This  type  of  sprite  movement  is  called  "scrolling."  To  scroll  your  sprite 
up  or  down  in  the  Y position,  you  only  have  to  use  ONE  LINE.  ERASE 
LINES  50  and  55  by  typing  the  line  numbers  by  themselves  and 
hitting  like  this: 


50  ( 
55  ( 


RETURN 

RETURN 


) 

) 


Now  enter  LINE  50  again  as  follows: 


50  POKE  V+4,24:FOR  Y=0TO255:POKE  V+5,Y:NEXT 


THE  DANCING  MOUSE— A SPRITE  PROGRAM  EXAMPLE 

Sometimes  the  techniques  described  in  a programmer's  reference 
manual  are  difficult  to  understand,  so  we've  put  together  a fun  sprite 
program  called  "Michael's  Dancing  Mouse."  This  program  uses  three 
different  sprites  in  a cute  animation  with  sound  effects  — and  to  help 
you  understand  how  it  works  we've  included  an  explanation  of  EACH 
COMMAND  so  you  can  see  exactly  how  the  program  is  constructed: 

166  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


15 

10 


:~542?2 : POKES+24, 15 : POKES, 220 : POKES* 1 
POKES+6, 215 

PQKES+7 , 120 : POKES+8, 100 : POKES* 12, 15 : 


, 63 : POKES+5 , 
POKES* 13, 215 


1 5 PR  I NT  H IT'  : V=53248  : POKE  V+2 1 , 1 
20  FORS 1 ~ 1 2288 TO  1 2350  : READQ  1 •*  POKES  1,01:  NEXT 
25  F0RS2® 1 2352T0 12414: READQ2 = P0KES2 , Q2 : NEXT 
3 0 F 0 R S 3 ^ 1 24 1 6T0 1 2478  : READ Q 3 : P n K ESS  , R3  : H E T 
35  POKEV+39 , 1 5 : POKEV+ 1 , 68 


lid 

40  PR  I NTT flB  <.  1 60  > " 5(1  AM  THE  DRNCINR  MAI  ISE  • H" 

45  P=  1 82 

5@  FORX®0 T 034 7S TEF'3 
55  RX~ I NT  < X/25S > : LX=X~RX*256 
60  POKEV , LX : POKEV+ 1 6 , RX 
70  I FP= 1 92THENG0 S U B 2 8 0 
75  I F P« 1 93THENGOSUB380 
80  POKE 2 040 , P : FORT- 1 TO60 : NEXT 
85  P~P*1 : I FP> 1 94THENP- 1 92 
90  NEXT 
95  END 


1 00  DR TR30 , 0 , 1 20 , 63 , 0 , 252 , 1 27 , 1 29 , 254 -127,129. 254 , 

1 27 , 1 89 , 254 , 1 27 , 255 , 254 

1 0 1 DAT A 63 , 255 , 252 , 3 1 , 1 87 , 248 , 3 , 1 87 , 1 92 , 1 - 255 ,12 R . 
3, 189, 192, 1 , 231 , 128, 1 , 255,  8 

1 02  DATA3 1 , 255 , 0 , 0 , 1 24 , 0 , 0 , 254 , 8 ,1,1 99 , 32  - 3 . 1 3 1 , 
224 , 7 , 1 , 1 92 , 1 , 1 92 , 0 , 3 , 1 92 ,8 

1 03  DATA38 , 8 , 1 28 , 63 , 8 - 252 . 1 27  - 1 29 , 0^4 , 1 -.7  1 -c, 

127,1 89 , 254 , 1 27 , 255 , 254  ^ ’’  '' 

1 04  DATA 63 , 255 , 252 , 3 1 , 22 1 , 248 , 3 , 221-1 92 , 1 , 255 , 1 , 
3, 255, 192, 1 , 195, 128, 1 , 231 , 3 

1 05  DRTR3 1 , 255 , 255 ,8,1 24 , 8 , 8 , 254 , 6 , 1,199-0,7,1 .1 29 . 
7 , © , 204 ,1,1 28 , 1 24 , 7 , 1 28 , 56 

1 06  DAT A38 , 8 , 1 28 , 63  - 8 - 252  - 1 27  - 1 '“'Q  , C54 ,127  1 -“>9  0=54 

127,189,254,127,255,254  ’ “ ' *' 


1 07  DAT A63 , 255 , 252 , 3 1 , 22 1 , 248 , 3 , 221,1 92 , 1 , 255 ,134, 
3 , 1 89 , 204 ,1,1 99 , 1 52 , 1 , 255 , 48 

1 88  DATA 1 , 255 , 224 , 1 , 252 , 8 , 3 , 254 , 8 

1 89  DAT A 7 , 1 4 , 0 , 284 , 1 4 , 8 , 248 , 56,8-112-11 2 - A , A , 6 A , A , 
-1  ' 

288  POKES +4 , 1 29 = POKES+4 , 1 28 : RETURN 
388  POKES* 11,1 29 : POKES* 11,1 28 : RETURN 


' v*r 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS  167 


LINE  5: 


S=54272 

POKES+24,15 
POKES, 220 

POKES  + 1,68 

POKES+5,15 

POKES+6,215 

LINE  10: 

POKES+7,120 
POKES+8,100 
POKES  + 12,15 
POKES  + 13,215 

LINE  15: 


■ shift 
clrThomeB 


V=53248 

POKEV+21 ,1 


Sets  the  variable  S equal  to  54272,  which  is  the 
beginning  memory  location  of  the  SOUND  CHIP. 
From  now  on,  instead  of  poking  a direct  memory 
location,  we  will  POKE  S plus  a value. 

Same  as  POKE  54296,15  which  sets  VOLUME  to 
highest  level. 

Same  as  POKE  54272,220  which  sets  Low  Fre- 
quency in  Voice  1 for  a note  which  approximates 
high  C in  Octave  6. 

Same  as  POKE  54273,68  which  sets  High  Fre- 
quency in  Voice  1 for  a note  which  approximates 
high  C in  Octave  6. 

Same  as  POKE  54277, 15  which  sets  Attack/Decay 
for  Voice  1 and  in  this  case  consists  of  the 
maximum  DECAY  level  with  no  attack,  which  pro- 
duces the  "echo"  effect. 

Same  as  POKE  54278,215  which  sets  Sustain/  Re- 
lease for  Voice  1 (215  represents  a combination 
of  sustain  and  release  values). 


Same  as  POKE  54279,120  which  sets  the  Low  Fre- 
quency for  Voice  2. 

Same  as  POKE  54280,100  which  sets  the  High 
Frequency  for  Voice  2. 

Same  as  POKE  54284, 15  which  sets  Attack/Decay 
for  Voice  2 to  same  level  as  Voice  1 above. 
Same  as  POKE  54285,215  which  sets  Sustain/  Re- 
lease for  Voice  2 to  same  level  as  Voice  1 above. 


Clears  the  screen  when  the  program  begins. 
Defines  the  variable  "V"  as  the  starting  location 
of  the  VIC  chip  which  controls  sprites.  From  now 
on  we  will  define  sprite  locations  as  V plus  a 
value. 

Turns  on  (enables)  sprite  number  1. 


168 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


LINE  20: 


FORS1  =12288 
TO  12350 


READ  Q1 


POKES1  ,Q1 


NEXT 


We  are  going  to  use  ONE  SPRITE  (sprite  0)  in  this 
animation,  but  we  are  going  to  use  THREE  sets  of 
sprite  data  to  define  three  separate  shapes.  To 
get  our  animation,  we  will  switch  the  POINTERS 
for  sprite  0 to  the  three  places  in  memory  where 
we  have  stored  the  data  which  defines  our  three 
different  shapes.  The  same  sprite  will  be  rede- 
fined rapidly  over  and  over  again  as  3 different 
shapes  to  produce  the  dancing  mouse  animation. 
You  can  define  dozens  of  sprite  shapes  in  DATA 
STATEMENTS,  and  rotate  those  shapes  through 
one  or  more  sprites.  So  you  see,  you  don't  have  to 
limit  one  sprite  to  one  shape  or  vice-versa.  One 
sprite  can  have  many  different  shapes,  simply  by 
changing  the  POINTER  SETTING  FOR  THAT 
SPRITE  to  different  places  in  memory  where  the 
sprite  data  for  different  shapes  is  stored.  This 
line  means  we  have  put  the  DATA  for  "sprite 
shape  1"  at  memory  locations  12288  to  12350. 

Reads  63  numbers  in  order  from  the  DATA  state- 
ments which  begin  at  line  100.  Q1  is  an  arbitrary 
variable  name.  It  could  just  as  easily  be  A,  Z1  or 
another  numeric  variable. 

Pokes  the  first  number  from  the  DATA  statements 
(the  first  "Ql"  is  30)  into  the  first  memory  location 
(the  first  memory  location  is  12288).  This  is  the 
same  as  POKE1 2288,30. 

This  tells  the  computer  to  look  BETWEEN  the  FOR 
and  NEXT  parts  of  the  loop  and  perform  those 
in-between  commands  (READQ1  and  POKESl,Ql 
using  the  NEXT  numbers  in  order).  In  other  words, 
the  NEXT  statement  makes  the  computer  READ  the 
NEXT  Ql  from  the  DATA  STATEMENTS,  which  is  0, 
and  also  increments  SI  by  1 to  the  next  value, 
which  is  12289.  The  result  is  POKE12289,0  . . . 
the  NEXT  command  makes  the  loop  keep  going 
back  until  the  last  values  in  the  series,  which  are 
POKE  12350,0. 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


169 


LINE  25: 


FORS2  = 12352 
TO  12414 


READQ2 


POKES2/Q2 


NEXT 
LINE  30: 

FORS3  = 12416 
TO  12478 
READQ3 
POKES3,Q3 

NEXT 


LINE  35: 

POKEV+39,15 
POKEV+ 1 ,68 


The  second  shape  of  sprite  zero  is  defined  by  the 
DATA  which  is  located  at  locations  12352  to 
12414.  NOTE  that  location  12351  is  SKIPPED  . . . 
this  is  the  64th  location  which  is  used  in  the 
definition  of  the  first  sprite  group  but  does  not 
contain  any  of  the  sprite  data  numbers.  Just  re- 
member when  defining  sprites  in  consecutive  lo- 
cations that  you  will  use  64  locations,  but  only 
POKE  sprite  data  into  the  first  63  locations. 
Reads  the  63  numbers  which  follow  the  numbers 
we  used  for  the  first  sprite  shape.  This  READ  sim- 
ply looks  for  the  very  next  number  in  the  DATA 
area  and  starts  reading  63  numbers,  one  at  a 
time. 

Pokes  the  data  (Q2)  into  the  memory  locations 
(S2)  for  our  second  sprite  shape,  which  begins  at 
location  12352. 

Same  use  as  line  20  above. 


The  third  shape  of  sprite  zero  is  defined  by  the 
DATA  to  be  located  at  locations  12416  to  12478. 
Reads  last  63  numbers  in  order  as  Q3. 

Pokes  those  numbers  into  locations  12416  to 
12478. 

Same  as  lines  20  and  25. 


Sets  color  for  sprite  0 to  light  grey. 

Sets  the  upper  right  hand  corner  of  the  sprite 
square  to  vertical  (Y)  position  68.  For  the  sake  of 
comparison,  position  50  is  the  top  lefthand  corner 
Y position  on  the  viewing  screen. 


170  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


LINE  40: 


PRINTTAB(160) 


CTRL  I WHT 


I AM  THE 
DANCING 
MOUSE! 

BD 


LINE  45: 
P = 1 92 


LINE  50: 

FORX=0TO347 

STEP3 


Tabs  160  spaces  from  the  top  lefthand  CHAR- 
ACTER SPACE  on  the  screen,  which  is  the  same  as 
4 rows  beneath  the  clear  command  . . . this  starts 
your  PRINT  message  on  the  6th  line  down  on  the 
screen. 

Hold  down  the  key  and  press  the  key 

marked  a*  the  same  time.  If  you  do  this 

inside  quotation  marks,  a "reversed  E"  will  ap- 
pear. This  sets  the  color  to  everything  PRINTed 
from  then  on  to  WHITE. 

This  is  a simple  PRINT  statement. 


This  sets  the  color  back  to  light  blue  when  the 
PRINT  statement  ends.  Holding  down  B and 
Q at  the  same  time  inside  quotation  marks 
causes  a "reversed  diamond  symbol"  to  appear. 


Sets  the  variable  P equal  to  192.  This  number  192 
is  the  pointer  you  must  use,  in  this  case  to  "point" 
sprite  0 to  the  memory  locations  that  begin  at  lo- 
cation 12288.  Changing  this  pointer  to  the  loca- 
tions of  the  other  two  sprite  shapes  is  the  secret  of 
using  one  sprite  to  create  an  animation  that  is 
actually  three  different  shapes. 


Steps  the  movement  of  your  sprite  3 X positions  at 
a time  (to  provide  fast  movement)  from  position  0 
to  position  347. 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


171 


LINE  55: 


RX=INT(X/256) 

LX=X-RX*256 


LINE  60: 
POKEY,  LX 


POKEV+  16,RX 

LINE  70: 

IFP=  1 92THEN 
GOSUB200 


RX  is  the  integer  of  X/256  which  means  that  RX  is 
rounded  off  to  0 when  X is  less  than  256,  and  RX 
becomes  1 when  X reaches  position  256.  We  will 
use  RX  in  a moment  to  POKE  V+16  with  a 0 or  1 
to  turn  on  the  "RIGHT  SIDE"  of  the  screen. 

When  the  sprite  is  at  X position  0,  the  formula 
looks  like  this:  LX  = 0 — (0  times  256)  or  0.  When 
the  sprite  is  at  X position  1 the  formula  looks  like 
this:  LX  = 1 — (0  times  256)  or  1 . When  the  sprite 
is  at  X position  256  the  formula  looks  like  this:  LX 
= 256  — (1  times  256)  or  0 which  resets  X back  to 
0 which  must  be  done  when  you  start  over  on  the 
RIGHT  SIDE  of  the  screen  (POKEV+16,1). 


You  POKE  V by  itself  with  a value  to  set  the  Hori- 
zontal (X)  Position  of  sprite  0 on  the  screen.  (See 
SPRITEMAKING  CHART  on  Page  176).  As  shown 
above,  the  value  of  LX,  which  is  the  horizontal 
position  of  the  sprite,  changes  from  0 to  255  and 
when  it  reaches  255  it  automatically  resets  back 
to  zero  because  of  the  LX  equation  set  up  in  line 
55. 

POKEV+16  always  turns  on  the  "right  side"  of 
the  screen  beyond  position  256,  and  resets  the 
horizontal  positioning  coordinates  to  zero.  RX  is 
either  a 0 or  a 1 based  on  the  position  of  the 
sprite  as  determined  by  the  RX  formula  in  line  55. 


If  the  sprite  pointer  is  set  to  192  (the  first  sprite 
shape)  the  waveform  control  for  the  first  sound  ef- 
fect is  set  to  129  and  128  per  line  200. 


172 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


LINE  75: 


IFP=  1 93THEN 
GOSUB300 


LINE  80: 
POKE2040,P 

FORT  = 1TO60: 
NEXT 

LINE  85: 

P=P+1 

IFP>194THEN 

P=192 


If  the  sprite  pointer  is  set  to  193  (the  second 
sprite  shape)  the  waveform  control  for  the  second 
sound  effect  (Voice  2)  is  set  to  129  and  128  per 
line  300. 


Sets  the  SPRITE  POINTER  to  location  192  (re- 
member P = 192  in  line  45?  Here's  where  we  use 
the  P). 

A simple  time  delay  loop  which  sets  the  speed  at 
which  the  mouse  dances.  (Try  a faster  or  slower 
speed  by  increasing/decreasing  the  number  60.) 


Now  we  increase  the  value  of  the  pointer  by  add- 
ing 1 to  the  original  value  of  P. 

We  only  want  to  point  the  sprite  to  3 memory  lo- 
cations. 192  points  to  locations  12288  to  12350, 
193  points  to  locations  12352  to  12414,  and  194 
points  to  locations  12416  to  12478.  This  line  tells 
the  computer  to  reset  P back  to  192  as  soon  as  P 
becomes  195  so  P never  really  becomes  195.  P is 
192,  193,  194  and  then  resets  back  to  192  and 
the  pointer  winds  up  pointing  consecutively  to  the 
three  sprite  shapes  in  the  three  64-byte  groups  of 
memory  locations  containing  the  DATA. 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS  173 


LINE  90: 


NEXTX 


LINE  95 
END 

LINES  100 
DATA 


After  the  sprite  has  become  one  of  the  3 different 
shapes  defined  by  the  DATA,  only  then  is  it 
allowed  to  move  across  the  screen.  It  will  jump  3 
X positions  at  a time  (instead  of  scrolling  smoothly 
one  position  at  a time,  which  is  also  possible). 
STEPping  3 positions  at  a time  makes  the  mouse 
"dance"  faster  across  the  screen.  NEXT  X matches 
the  FOR.  . . X position  loop  in  line  50. 


ENDs  the  program,  which  occurs  when  the  sprite 
moves  off  the  screen. 


109 


The  sprite  shapes  are  read  from  the  data  num- 
bers, in  order.  First  the  63  numbers  which  com- 
prise sprite  shape  1 are  read,  then  the  63  num- 
bers for  sprite  shape  2,  and  then  sprite  shape  3. 
This  data  is  permanently  read  into  the  3 memory 
locations  and  after  it  is  read  into  these  locations, 
all  the  program  has  to  do  is  point  sprite  0 at  the 
3 memory  locations  and  the  sprite  automatically 
takes  the  shape  of  the  data  in  those  locations. 
We  are  pointing  the  sprite  at  3 locations  one  at  a 
time  which  produces  the  "animation"  effect.  If 
you  want  to  see  how  these  numbers  affect  each 
sprite,  try  changing  the  first  3 numbers  in  LINE 
100  to  255,  255,  255.  See  the  section  on  defining 
sprite  shapes  for  more  information. 


174 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


LINE  200: 


POKES+4,129 

Waveform  control  set  to  129  turns  on  the  sound 
effect. 

POKES+4,128 

Waveform  control  set  to  128  turns  off  the  sound 
effect. 

RETURN 

Sends  program  back  to  end  of  line  70  after 
waveform  control  settings  are  changed,  to  resume 
program. 

LINE  300: 

POKES  + 11,129 

Waveform  control  set  to  129  turns  on  the  sound 
effect. 

POKES  + 11,128 

Waveform  control  set  to  128  turns  off  the  sound 
effect. 

RETURN 

Sends  program  back  to  end  of  line  75  to  resume. 

PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS  175 

; 


EASY  SPRITEMAKING  CHART 


SPRITE 

0 

SPRITE 

1 

SPRITE 

2 

SPRITE 

3 

SPRITE 

4 

SPRITE 

5 

SPRITE 

6 

SPRITE 

7 

Turn  on  Sprite 

V+21,1 

V+21,2 

V+21,4 

V+21,8 

V+21,16 

V+21,32 

V+21,64 

V+21,128 

Put  in  Memory 
(Set  Pointers) 

2040, 

192 

2041, 

193 

2042, 

194 

2043, 

195 

2044, 

196 

2045, 

197 

2046, 

198 

2047, 

199 

Locations  for 

Sprite  Pixel 
(12288-12798) 

12288 

to 

12350 

12352 

to 

12414 

12416 

to 

12478 

12480 

to 

12542 

12544 

to 

12606 

12608 

to 

12670 

12672 

to 

12734 

12736 

to 

12798 

Sprite  Color 

V+39,C 

V+40,C 

V+41  ,C 

V+42,C 

V+43,C 

V+44,C 

V+45,C 

V+46,C 

Set  LEFT  X 

Position  (0-255) 

V+0,X 

V+2,X 

V+4,X 

V+6,X 

V+8,X 

V+10,X 

V+12,X 

V+14,X 

Set  RIGHT  X 

Position  (0-255) 

V+16,1 

v+o,x 

V+16,2 

V+2,X 

V+16,4 

V+4,X 

V+16,8 

V+6,X 

V+16,16 

V+8,X 

V+16,32 

V+10,X 

V+ 16,64 

V+12,X 

V+16,128 

V+14,X 

Set  Y Position 

V+1,Y 

V+3,Y 

V+5,Y 

V+7,  Y 

V+9,Y 

V+l  1,Y 

V+13,Y 

V+15,Y 

Expand  Sprite 
Horizontally/X 

V+29,1 

V+29,2 

V+29,4 

V+29,8 

V+29,16 

V+29,32 

V+29,64 

V+29,1 28 

Expand  Sprite 
Vertically/Y 

V+23,1 

V+23,2 

V+23,4 

V+23,8 

V+23,16 

V+23,32 

V+23,64 

V+23,1 28 

Turn  On  (Set) 

Multi-Color  Mode 

V+28,1 

V+28,2 

V+28,4 

V+28,8 

V+28,16 

V+28,32 

V+28,64 

V+28,1 28 

Multi-Color  1 

(First  Color) 

V+37,C 

V+37,C 

V+37,C 

V+37,C 

V+37,C 

V+37,C 

V+37,C 

V+37,C 

Multi-Color  2 

(Second  Color) 

V+38,C 

V+38,C 

V+38,C 

V+38,C 

V+38,C 

V+38,C 

V+38,C 

V+38,C 

Set  Priority 
of  Sprites 

The  rule  is  that  lower  numbered  sprites  always  have  display 
numbered  sprites.  For  example,  sprite  0 has  priority  over  ALI 
7 has  last  priority.  This  means  lower  numbered  sprites  alw 
IN  FRONT  OF  or  ON  TOP  OF  higher  numbered  sprites. 

/ priority  o\ 
L other  sprii 

ays  appeal 

/er  higher 
tes,  sprite 

r to  move 

Collision  (Sprite 
to  Sprite) 

V+30  IF  PEEK( V + 30)AN DX = X THEN  [action] 

Collision  (Sprite 
to  Background)  1 

V+31  IF  PEEK(V+31)ANDX  = X THEN  [action] 

176  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


SPRITEMAKING  NOTES 


Alternative  Sprite  Memory  Pointers  and  Memory  Locations 
Using  Cassette  Buffer 


Put  in  Memory 
(Set  pointers) 

SPRITE  0 

2040,13 

SPRITE  1 

2041,14 

SPRITE  2 

2042,15 

Sprite  Pixel 
Locations  for 

Blocks  13—15 

832 

to  894 

896 

to  958 

960 

to  1022 

If  you're  using  1 to  3 sprites 
you  can  use  these  memory 
locations  in  the  cassette 
buffer  (832  to  1023)  but 
for  more  than  3 sprites  we 
suggest  using  locations  from 
12288  to  12798  (see  chart). 


TURNING  ON  SPRITES: 

You  can  turn  on  any  individual  sprite  by  using  POKE  V + 21  and  the 
number  from  the  chart  . . . BUT  . . . turning  on  just  ONE  sprite  will  turn 
OFF  any  others.  To  turn  on  TWO  OR  MORE  sprites,  ADD  TOGETHER  the 
numbers  of  the  sprites  you  want  to  turn  on  (Example:  POKE  V+21 , 6 turns 
on  sprites  1 and  2).  Here  is  a method  you  can  use  to  turn  one  sprite  off 
and  on  without  affecting  any  of  the  others  (useful  for  animation). 

EXAMPLE: 

To  turn  off  just  sprite  0 type:  POKE  V + 21, PEEK  V+21  AND(255- 1). 
Change  the  number  1 in  (255-1)  to  1,2,4,8,16,32,64,  or  128  (for  sprites 
0—7).  To  re-enable  the  sprite  and  not  affect  the  other  sprites  currently 
turned  on,  POKE  V+21,  PEEK(V  + 21)OR  1 and  change  the  OR  1 to  OR  2 
(sprite  2),  OR  4 (sprite  3),  etc. 

X POSITION  VALUES  BEYOND  255: 

X positions  run  from  0 to  255  . . . and  then  START  OVER  from  0 to 
255.  To  put  a sprite  beyond  X position  255  on  the  far  right  side  of  the 
screen,  you  must  first  POKE  V+16  as  shown,  THEN  POKE  a new  X value 
from  0 to  63,  which  will  place  the  sprite  in  one  of  the  X positions  at  the 
right  side  of  the  screen.  To  get  back  to  positions  0-255,  POKE  V+16,0 
and  POKE  in  an  X value  from  0 to  255. 

Y POSITION  VALUES: 

Y positions  run  from  0 to  255,  including  0 to  49  off  the  TOP  of  the 
viewing  area,  50  to  229  IN  the  viewing  area,  and  230  to  255  off  the 
BOTTOM  of  the  viewing  area. 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


177 


SPRITE  COLORS: 

To  make  sprite  0 WHITE,  type:  POKE  V+39,1  (use  COLOR  POKE  SET- 
TING shown  in  chart,  and  INDIVIDUAL  COLOR  CODES  shown  below): 


0—  BLACK 

1—  WHITE 

2 — RED 

3 — CYAN 


4 — PURPLE 
5— GREEN 
6 — BLUE 
7— YELLOW 


8 — ORANGE  12  — MED.  GREY 

9 — BROWN  13  — LT.  GREEN 

10  — LT.  RED  14— LT.  BLUE 
11— DARK  GREY  15— LT.  GREY 


MEMORY  LOCATION: 

You  must  "reserve"  a separate  64-BYTE  BLOCK  of  numbers  in  the 
computer's  memory  for  each  sprite  of  which  63  BYTES  will  be  used  for 
sprite  data.  The  memory  settings  shown  below  are  recommended  for 
the  "sprite  pointer"  settings  in  the  chart  above.  Each  sprite  will  be 
unique  and  you'll  have  to  define  it  as  you  wish.  To  make  all  sprites 
exactly  the  same,  point  the  sprites  you  want  to  look  the  same  to  the 
same  register  for  sprites. 

DIFFERENT  SPRITE  POINTER  SETTINGS: 

These  sprite  pointer  settings  are  RECOMMENDATIONS  ONLY. 

Caution:  you  can  set  your  sprite  pointers  anywhere  in  RAM  memory 
but  if  you  set  them  too  "low"  in  memory  a long  BASIC  program  may 
overwrite  your  sprite  data,  or  vice  versa.  To  protect  an  especially  LONG 
BASIC  PROGRAM  from  overwriting  sprite  data,  you  may  want  to  set  the 
sprites  at  a higher  area  of  memory  (for  example,  2040,192  for  sprite  0 
at  locations  12288  to  12350  . . . 2041,193  at  locations  12352  to  12414 
for  sprite  1 and  so  on  ...  by  adjusting  the  memory  locations  from  which 
sprites  get  their  "data,"  you  can  define  as  many  as  64  different  sprites 
plus  a sizable  BASIC  program.  To  do  this,  define  several  sprite  "shapes" 
in  your  DATA  statements  and  then  redefine  a particular  sprite  by  chang- 
ing the  "pointer"  so  the  sprite  you  are  using  is  "pointed"  at  different 
areas  of  memory  containing  different  sprite  picture  data.  See  the  "Danc- 
ing Mouse"  to  see  how  this  works.  If  you  want  two  or  more  sprites  to 
have  THE  SAME  SHAPE  (you  can  still  change  position  and  color  of  each 
sprite),  use  the  same  sprite  pointer  and  memory  location  for  the  sprites 
you  want  to  match  (for  example,  you  can  point  sprites  0 and  1 to  the 
same  location  by  using  POKE  2040,192  and  POKE  2041,  192). 


178  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


PRIORITY: 


Priority  means  one  sprite  will  appear  to  move  "in  front  of"  or  "behind" 
another  sprite  on  the  display  screen.  Sprites  with  more  priority  always 
appear  to  move  "in  front  of"  or  "on  top  of"  sprites  with  less  priority.  The 
rule  is  that  lower  numbered  sprites  have  priority  over  higher  numbered 
sprites.  Sprite  0 has  priority  over  all  other  sprites.  Sprite  7 has  no  priority 
in  relation  to  the  other  sprites.  Sprite  1 has  priority  over  sprites  2-7,  etc. 
If  you  put  two  sprites  in  the  same  position,  the  sprite  with  the  higher 
priority  will  appear  IN  FRONT  OF  the  sprite  with  the  lower  priority.  The 
sprite  with  lower  priority  will  either  be  obscured,  or  will  "show  through" 
(from  "behind")  the  sprite  with  higher  priority. 

USING  MULTI-COLOR: 

You  can  create  multi-colored  sprites  although  using  multi-color  mode 
requires  that  you  use  PAIRS  of  pixels  instead  of  individual  pixels  in  your 
sprite  picture  (in  other  words  each  colored  "dot"  or  "block"  in  the  sprite 
will  consist  of  two  pixels  side  by  side).  You  have  4 colors  to  choose  from: 
Sprite  Color  (chart  above),  Multi-Color  1,  Multi-Color  2 and  "Background 
Color"  (background  is  achieved  by  using  zero  settings  which  let  the 
background  color  "show  through").  Consider  one  horizontal  8-pixel  block 
in  a sprite  picture.  The  color  of  each  PAIR  of  pixels  is  determined  accord- 
ing to  whether  the  left,  right,  or  both  pixels  are  solid,  like  this: 


m BACKGROUND  (Making  BOTH  PIXELS  BLANK  (zero)  lets  the 
INNER  SCREEN  COLOR  (backg round  ) show 
through.) 

Lilli  MULTI-COLOR  1 (Making  the  RIGHT  PIXEL  SOLID  in  a pair  of 
pixels  sets  BOTH  PIXELS  to  Multi-Color  1 .) 

J SPRITE  COLOR  (Making  the  LEFT  PIXEL  SOLID  in  a pair  of  pixels 
sets  BOTH  PIXELS  to  Sprite  Color.) 

llilli  MULTI-COLOR  2 (Making  BOTH  PIXELS  SOLID  in  a pair  of  pixels 
sets  BOTH  PIXELS  to  Multi-Color  2.) 


PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


179 


Look  at  the  horizontal  8-pixel  row  shown  below.  This  block  sets  the 
first  two  pixels  to  background  color,  the  second  two  pixels  to  Multi-Color 
1,  the  third  two  pixels  to  Sprite  Color  and  the  fourth  two  pixels  to  Multi- 
Color  2.  The  color  of  each  PAIR  of  pixels  depends  on  which  bits  in 
each  pair  are  solid  and  which  are  blank,  according  to  the  illustration 
above.  After  you  determine  which  colors  you  want  in  each  pair  of  pixels, 
the  next  step  is  to  add  the  values  of  the  solid  pixels  in  the  8-pixel  block, 
and  POKE  that  number  into  the  proper  memory  location.  For  example,  if 
the  8-pixel  row  shown  below  is  the  first  block  in  a sprite  which  begins  at 
memory  location  832,  the  value  of  the  solid  pixels  is  16  + 8 + 2+1  = 27 
so  you  would  POKE  832,27. 


27 


128 

64 

32 

16 

16  + 8 + 2 + 1 

8 | 4 | 2 | 1 

l 

o 

LOOKS  LIKE  THIS  IN  SPRITE 

O 

BACKGROUND 

COLOR 

MULTICOLOR 

1 

SPRITE 

COLOR 

MULTICOLOR 

2 

COLLISION: 

You  can  detect  whether  a sprite  has  collided  with  another  sprite  by 
using  this  line:  IF  PEEK(V+30)ANDX=XTHEN  [insert  action  here].  This  line 
checks  to  see  if  a particular  sprite  has  collided  with  ANY  OTHER  SPRITE 
where  X equals  1 for  sprite  0,  2 for  sprite  1,  4 for  sprite  2,  8 for  sprite  3,' 
16  for  sprite  4,  32  for  sprite  5,  64  for  sprite  6,  and  128  for  sprite  7.  To 

" e,CFp,!°  SSe,  !f  ,the  Spnte  has  collided  with  a "BACKGROUND  CHAR- 
ACTER use  this  line:  IF  PEEK(V+3 1 )ANDX=XTHEN  [insert  action  here]. 


180  PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


USING  GRAPHIC  CHARACTERS  IN  DATA  STATEMENTS 


The  following  program  allows  you  to  create  a sprite  using  blanks  and 
solid  circles  ( pUffgH  Q ) in  DATA  statements.  The  sprite  and  the  num- 
bers POKEd  into  the  sprite  data  registers  are  displayed. 


PR  I NT"  IT  : FOR  I =01063  •'  P0KE832+1 , 0 : NEXT 
GOSUB60000 


10 
28 
999  END 
60000 
60001 
60002 

60003 

60004 

60005 

60006 

60007 

60008 
60009 
60810 
60011 
60012 
60013 
60814 

60015 

60016 

60017 

60018 
68019 
60020 


POKEV+39,  1 4 : POKE 20 40  .•  13 
68105  POKEV+23, 1 :P0KEV+29, 1 

601 10  FOR I =01020 : REflDfl* : FORK*0TO2 : T=0 : FORJ«0TO7 : B=0 

60 1 40  I FM 1 D*  C m , J+K#8+ 1 , 1 ::■  = "«  " THEME- 1 

60 1 50  T=T+B*2  K 7— J ) • NEXT  : PR  I NTT  j : P0KE832+ 1 #3+K ..  T : 

NEXT: PR I NT: NEXT 

60200  RETURN 


DATA" 

0000000 

DATA" 

mmmmmmmm 

ERTfi" 

• ® 0 ® 0®  ®®  ®®  ® iUi  i0i 

DAT  A" 

>»®»®©  ©mm 

DATA" 

mm®  o®®  ®®®® 

DRTfl" 

®®®#e  #®«  ••••• 

DRTR" 

®®®®t  00®  ®tt«® 

DATA" 

®®®®®  ®o®e* 

DRTR" 

tin®®®®®®®®®®® 

DRTR" 

0®®®®®®®®®®®® 

DRTR" 

® ®®®®®®®w©  ® 

DRTfl" 

<i  ©mm®©  ® 

DRTR" 

® ®t®tt®  ® 

DRTR" 

® ®®iBH  ® 

DRTR" 

® 00®  ® 

DRTR" 

0 # « 

DRTR" 

® ® • 

DRTR" 

DRTR" 

«©«#« 

DRTfl" 

0000® 

DRTR" 

®0® 

7*53248 : 

: POKE'vU  200  : POKEV+1 . 

PROGRAMMING  GRAPHICS 


181 


CHAPTER 


PROGRAMMING 
SOUND  AND 
MUSIC  ON  YOUR 
COMMODORE  64 

• Introduction 

Volume  Control 
Frequencies  of  Sound  Waves 

• Using  Multiple  Voices 

• Changing  Waveforms 

• The  Envelope  Generator 

• Filtering 

• Advanced  Techniques 

• Synchronization  and  Ring 
Modulation 


183 


INTRODUCTION 


Your  Commodore  computer  is  equipped  with  one  of  the  most  sophisti- 
cated electronic  music  synthesizers  available  on  any  computer.  It  comes 
complete  with  three  voices,  totally  addressable,  ATTACK/DECAY/ 
SUSTAIN/RELEASE  (ADSR),  filtering,  modulation,  and  "white  noise."  All 
of  these  capabilities  are  directly  available  for  you  through  a few  easy  to 
use  BASIC  and/or  assembly  language  statements  and  functions.  This 
means  that  you  can  make  very  complex  sounds  and  songs  using  pro- 
grams that  are  relatively  simple  to  design. 

This  section  of  your  Programmer's  Reference  Guide  has  been  created 
to  help  you  explore  all  the  capabilities  of  the  6581  "SID"  chip,  the  sound 
and  music  synthesizer  inside  your  Commodore  computer.  We'll  explain 
both  the  theory  behind  musical  ideas  and  the  practical  aspects  of  turn- 
ing those  ideas  into  real  finished  songs  on  your  Commodore  computer. 

You  need  not  be  an  experienced  programmer  nor  a music  expert  to 
achieve  exciting  results  from  the  music  synthesizer.  This  section  is  full  of 
programming  examples  with  complete  explanations  to  get  you  started. 

You  get  to  the  sound  generator  by  POKEing  into  specified  memory 
locations.  A full  list  of  the  locations  used  is  provided  in  Appendix  O.  We 
will  go  through  each  concept,  step  by  step.  By  the  end  you  should  be 
able  to  create  an  almost  infinite  variety  of  sounds,  and  be  ready  to 
perform  experiments  with  sound  on  your  own. 

Each  section  of  this  chapter  begins  by  giving  you  an  example  and  a 
full  line-by-line  description  of  each  program,  which  will  show  you  how  to 
use  the  characteristic  being  discussed.  The  technical  explanation  is  for 
you  to  read  whenever  you  are  curious  about  what  is  actually  going  on. 

The  workhorse  of  your  sound  programs  is  the  POKE  statement.  POKE 
sets  the  indicated  memory  location  (MEM)  equal  to  a specified  value 
(NUM). 

POKE  MEM,NUM 


The  memory  locations  (MEM)  used  for  music  synthesis  start  at  54272 
($D400)  in  the  Commodore  64.  The  memory  locations  54272  to  54296 
inclusive  are  the  POKE  locations  you  need  to  remember  when  you're 
using  the  6581  (SID)  chip  register  map.  Another  way  to  use  the  locations 
above  is  to  remember  only  location  54272  and  then  add  a number  from 
0 through  24  to  it.  By  doing  this  you  can  POKE  all  the  locations  from 
54272  to  54296  that  you  need  from  the  SID  chip.  The  numbers  (NUM) 


184 


PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


that  you  use  in  your  POKE  statement  must  be  between  0 and  255, 
inclusive. 

When  you've  had  a little  more  practice  with  making  music,  then  you 
can  get  a little  more  involved,  by  using  the  PEEK  function.  PEEK  is  a 
function  that  is  equal  to  the  value  currently  in  the  indicated  memory 
location. 

X = PEEK(MEM) 

The  value  of  the  variable  X is  set  equal  to  the  current  contents  of  mem- 
ory location  MEM. 

Of  course,  your  programs  include  other  BASIC  commands,  but  for  a 
full  explanation  of  them,  refer  to  the  BASIC  Statements  section  of  this 
manual. 

Let's  jump  right  in  and  try  a simple  program  using  only  one  of  the 
three  voices.  Computer  ready?  Type  NEW,  then  type  in  this  program, 
and  save  it  on  your  Commodore  DATASSETTE™  or  disk.  Then,  RUN  it. 

EXAMPLE  PROGRAM  1 : 


5 3=54272 

10  F0RL=STOS+24  : POKEL,  0 : NEXT  : REM  CLEAR  SOUND  CHIP 
20  POKES+5 , 9 : POKES+S, 0 

30  POKE 3+ 24..  15  = REM  SET  VOLUME  TO 

MAXIMUM 

40  READHF..  LF,  DR 

50  I F HF <0 THEN E N D 

60  POKE 8+ 1 , HF • POKES , LF 

70  POKE 3+ 4 .■  33 

00  FORT = 1 TODR : NEXT 

90  POKES+4 , 32 : FORT® 1 T050 : NEXT 

100  GOTO 40 

1 1 0 DATA25 , 1 77 , 250 , 28 , 2 1 4 , 250 
1 20  DATA25 ,177 , 250 , 25 , 1 77 , 250 
1 30  DAT A 25 ,177,1 25 , 28 , 2 14,1 25 
1 40  DATA32 , 94 , 750 , 25 , 1 77 , 250 
1 50  DAT A28  .-214 , 250 , 1 9 , 63 , 250 
1 60  DATA 1 9 , 63 , 250 , 1 9 , 63 , 250 
1 70  DAT A 2 1 , 1 54 , 63 , 24 , 63 , 63 
1 SO  DATA25 , 1 77 , 250 , 24 , 63 , 1 25 
1 90  DATA 1 9 , 63 , 250 , - 1 , - 1 , - 1 


Here's  a line-by-line  description  of  the  program  you've  just  typed  in. 
Refer  to  it  whenever  you  feel  the  need  to  investigate  parts  of  the  pro- 
gram that  you  don't  understand  completely. 


PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


185 


LINE-BY-LINE  EXPLANATION  OF  EXAMPLE  PROGRAM  1: 


Line(s) 

Description 

5 

Set  S to  start  of  sound  chip. 

10 

Clear  all  sound  chip  registers. 

20 

Set  Attack/Decay  for  voice  1 (A=0,D  = 9). 

Set  Sustain/Release  for  voice  1 (S  = 0,R  = 0). 

30 

Set  volume  at  maximum. 

40 

Read  high  frequency,  low  frequency,  duration  of  note. 

50 

When  high  frequency  less  than  zero,  song  is  over. 

60 

Poke  high  and  low  frequency  of  voice  1. 

70 

Gate  sawtooth  waveform  for  voice  1 . 

80 

Timing  loop  for  duration  of  note. 

90 

Release  sawtooth  waveform  for  voice  1 . 

100 

Return  for  next  note. 

110-180 

Data  for  song:  high  frequency,  low  frequency,  duration 

(number  of  counts)  for  each  note. 

190 

Last  note  of  song  and  negative  Is  signaling  end  of  song. 

VOLUME  CONTROL 

Chip  register  24  contains  the  overall  volume  control.  The  volume  can 
be  set  anywhere  between  0 and  15.  The  other  four  bits  are  used  for 
purposes  well  get  into  later.  For  now  it  is  enough  to  know  volume  is  0 to 
15.  Look  at  line  30  to  see  how  it's  set  in  Example  Program  1. 

FREQUENCIES  OF  SOUND  WAVES 

Sound  is  created  by  the  movement  of  air  in  waves.  Think  of  throwing 
a stone  into  a pool  and  seeing  the  waves  radiate  outward.  When  similar 
waves  are  created  in  air,  we  hear  it.  If  we  measure  the  time  between 
one  peak  of  a wave  and  the  next,  we  find  the  number  of  seconds  for 
one  cycle  of  the  wave  (n  = number  of  seconds).  The  reciprocal  of  this 
number  (l/n)  gives  you  the  cycles  per  second.  Cycles  per  second  are 
more  commonly  known  as  the  frequency.  The  highness  or  lowness  of  a 
sound  (pitch)  is  determined  by  the  frequency  of  the  sound  waves  pro- 
duced. 

The  sound  generator  in  your  Commodore  computer  uses  two  locations 
to  determine  the  frequency.  Appendix  E gives  you  the  frequency  values 
you  need  to  reproduce  a full  eight  octaves  of  musical  notes.  To  create  a 


186  PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


frequency  other  than  the  ones  listed  in  the  note  table  use  ''Fout"  (fre- 
quency output)  and  the  following  formula  to  represent  the  frequency  (Fn) 
of  the  sound  you  want  to  create.  Remember  that  each  note  requires 
both  a high  and  a low  frequency  number. 

Fn  = Fout/.  06097 

Once  you've  figured  out  what  Fn  is  for  your  "new"  note  the  next  step  is 
to  create  the  high  and  low  frequency  values  for  that  note.  To  do  this  you 
must  first  round  off  Fn  so  that  any  numbers  to  the  right  of  the  decimal 
point  are  left  off.  You  are  now  left  with  an  integer  value.  Now  you  can 
set  the  high  frequency  location  (Fhi)  by  using  the  formula  Fhi  = INT(Fn/256) 
and  the  low  frequency  location  (Fio)  should  be  F|0  = Fn  — (256* Fhi). 

At  this  point  you  have  already  played  with  one  voice  of  your  compu- 
ter. If  you  wanted  to  stop  here  you  could  find  a copy  of  your  favorite 
tune  and  become  the  maestro  conducting  your  own  computer  orchestra 
in  your  "at  home"  concert  hall. 


USING  MULTIPLE  VOICES 


Your  Commodore  computer  has  three  independently  controlled  voices 
(oscillators).  Our  first  example  program  used  only  one  of  them.  Later  on, 
you'll  learn  how  to  change  the  quality  of  the  sound  made  by  the  voices. 
But  right  now,  let's  get  all  three  voices  singing. 

This  example  program  shows  you  one  way  to  translate  sheet  music  for 
your  computer  orchestra.  Try  typing  it  in,  and  then  SAVE  it  on  your 
DATASSETTE™  or  disk.  Don't  forget  to  type  NEW  before  typing  in  this 
program. 

EXAMPLE  PROGRAM  2: 

10  S=54272  : FGRL=ST0S+24  : POKEL,  0 : NEXT 
20  DIMHC2. 200) 200)^0(2/ 200) 

30  DIMFGK11) 

40  V C 0 ) a 1 7 : V < 1 ) -65 : V C 2 ) =33 
50  POKES+10, S : POKES+22, 128 : POKES+23, 244 
60  FORI -©TO 1 1 : REflDFQC I ) : NEXT 
100  FORK=0TO2 
110  1=0 
120  RERDNM 
130  IFNM*0THEN250 

1 40  WR=V ( K > : WB=Wfl- 1 • I FNM<0THENNM*-NM : Wfl=0 • UB=0 
1 50  DRX=NMX  128:  0C 52*  ( NM- 1 28*BRX ) / 1 6 
1 60  NT =NM- 1 28#DRX- 1 6*0CX 
170  FR-FQ  C NT ) 


PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


187 


180  IFOC/i=7THEN200 

1 90  FOR J*6T00CXSTEP- 1 • FR-FR/2 : NEXT 

200  HFX=FR/256 : LFX*FR-256#HFX 

210  1 FDRX~  1 THENH ( K , I ) =HFX  • L(K,  I ) *LF7tf : C ( K , I > *Wfl  •' 

1=1+1 : GOTO 120 

220  FOR  J*  1 TODR5i- 1 : H ( K , I ) *HFX  : L(K,  I ) =LF7i : C ( K , I ) *WR 
1*1+1 : NEXT 

230  H C K , I ) *HFX : L < K , I > *LFX : C ( K , I ) »WE 
240  1=1+1 : GOTO 120 
250  I F I > I MTHEN I M* I 
260  NEXT 

500  POKES+5 , 0 : POKES+6 , 240 
5 1 0 POKES+ 1 2 , 85 : POKES+ 13,1 33 
520  POKES+ 19,10: POKES+20 , 1 97 
530  P0KE5+24, 31 
540  FORI*0TOIM 

550  POKES , L ( 0 , 1 > : POKES+7 , L ( 1 , 1 > : POKES+ 1 4 , L C 2 , 1 ) 
560  POKES+ 1 , H ( 0 , I) : POKES+8 ,H(1,I): POKES+ 1 5 , H C 2 , I > 
570  POKES+4 , C (0,1 > : POKES+ 1 1 , C ( 1 , I > : POKES+ 1 8 , C ( 2 , I 


580  FORT* 1 TO80 : NEXT : NEXT 
590  FORT*1TO200 : NEXT : POKES+24, 0 
600  DATR34334, 36376, 38539, 40830 
6 1 0 DRTR43258 , 45830 , 48556 , 5 1 443 
620  DRTR54502, 57743, 61 176,64814 
1000  DRTR594, 594, 594, 596, 596 
1 0 1 0 DRTfl 1618, 587 , 592 , 587 , 585 , 33 1 
1 020  DflTR  1 097 , 583 , 585 , 585 , 585 , 587 
1 030  DRTR 1 609 , 585 , 33 1 , 337 , 594 , 594 
1 040  DRTR 16 18, 594 , 596 , 594 , 592 , 587 
1 050  DRTR 1 6 1 6 , 587 , 585 , 33 1 , 336 , 84 1 
I860  DRTR 1607 

1999  DRTR0 

2000  DRTR583 , 585 , 583 , 583 , 327 , 329 
20 1 0 DRTR 1611, 583 , 585 , 578 , 578 , 578 
2020  DRTR 196, 198,583,326,578 
2030  DRTR326 , 327 , 329 , 327 , 329 , 326 , 
2040  DRTR 1 606 , 582 , 322 , 324 ,582, 587 
2050  DRTR329 , 327 , 1 606 , 583 

2060  DRTR327 , 329 , 587 , 33 1 , 329 
2070  DRTR329, 328, 1609, 578, 834 
2080  DRTR324 , 322 , 327 , 585 , 1 602 
2999  DRTR0 


, 336 
,587 
, 593 


578,583 


3000  DRTR567 , 566 , 567 , 304 , 306 , 308 , 3 1 0 
30 1 0 DRTR 1 59 1 , 567 ,311,310, 567 


3020  DRTR306, 304, 299, 308 
3030  DRTR304 , 171, 1 76 , 306 ,291, 55 1 , 306 , 308 
3040  DRTR3 1 0 , 308 , 3 1 0 , 306 , 295 , 297 , 299 , 304 
3050  DRTR 1 586 , 562 , 567 , 3 10,315 , 3 1 1 


3060  DRTR308 , 3 1 3 , 237 

3070  DRTR 1586, 567, 560,311 , 303 

3080  DRTR308 , 309 , 306 , 308 

3090  DflTR 1 577 , 299 , 295 , 306 , 3 10,311, 304 

3 1 00  DRT R562 , 546 , 1 575 

3999  DRTR0 


188 


PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


Here  is  a line-by-line  explanation  of  Example  Program  2.  For  now,  we 
are  interested  in  how  the  three  voices  are  controlled. 

LINE-BY-LINE  EXPLANATION  OF  EXAMPLE  PROGRAM  2: 


Line(s) 

Description 

10 

Set  S equal  to  start  of  sound  chip  and  clear  all  sound 
chip  registers. 

20 

Dimension  arrays  to  contain  activity  of  song,  1 /l  6th  of  a 
measure  per  location. 

30 

Dimension  array  to  contain  base  frequency  for  each  note. 

40 

Store  waveform  control  byte  for  each  voice. 

50 

Set  high  pulse  width  for  voice  2. 

Set  high  frequency  for  filter  cutoff. 

Set  resonance  for  filter  and  filter  voice  3. 

60 

Read  in  base  frequency  for  each  note. 

100 

Begin  decoding  loop  for  each  voice. 

110 

Initialize  pointer  to  activity  array. 

120 

Read  coded  note. 

130 

If  coded  note  is  zero,  then  next  voice. 

140 

Set  waveform  controls  to  proper  voice. 

If  silence,  set  waveform  controls  to  0. 

150 

Decode  duration  and  octave. 

160 

Decode  note. 

170 

Get  base  frequency  for  this  note. 

180 

If  highest  octave,  skip  division  loop. 

190 

Divide  base  frequency  by  2 appropriate  number  of  times. 

200 

Get  high  and  low  frequency  bytes. 

210 

If  sixteenth  note,  set  activity  array:  high  frequency,  low 
frequency,  and  waveform  control  (voice  on). 

220 

For  all  but  last  beat  of  note,  set  activity  array:  high 
frequency,  low  frequency,  waveform  control  (voice  on). 

230 

For  last  beat  of  note,  set  activity  array:  high  frequency, 
low  frequency,  waveform  control  (voice  off). 

240 

Increment  pointer  to  activity  array.  Get  next  note. 

250 

If  longer  than  before,  reset  number  of  activities. 

260 

Go  back  for  next  voice. 

500 

Set  Attack/Decay  for  voice  1 (A=0,  D = 0). 

Set  Sustain/Release  for  voice  1 (S=15,  R = 0). 

PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


189 


Line(s) 

Description 

510 

Set  Attack/Decay  for  voice  2 (A=5,  D = 5). 

Set  Sustain/Release  for  voice  2 (S  = 8,  R = 5). 

520 

Set  Attack/Decay  for  voice  3 (A=0,  D=10). 

Set  Sustain/Release  for  voice  3 (S=12,  R = 5). 

530 

Set  volume  15,  low-pass  filtering. 

540 

Start  loop  for  every  1 / 1 6th  of  a measure. 

550 

POKE  low  frequency  from  activity  array  for  all  voices. 

560 

POKE  high  frequency  from  activity  array  for  all  voices. 

570 

POKE  waveform  control  from  activity  array  for  all  voices. 

580 

Timing  loop  for  1 / 1 6th  of  a measure  and  back  for  next 
l/l6th  measure. 

590 

Pause,  then  turn  off  volume. 

600-620 

Base  frequency  data. 

1000-1999 

Voice  1 data. 

2000-2999 

Voice  2 data. 

3000-3999 

Voice  3 data. 

The  values  used  in  the  data  statements  were  found  by  using  the  note 
table  in  Appendix  E and  the  chart  below: 


NOTE  TYPE 

DURATION 

1/16 

128 

1/8 

256 

DOTTED  1/8 

384 

1/4 

512 

1/4+1/16 

640 

DOTTED  1/4 

768 

1/2 

1024 

1/2+1/16 

1152 

1/2+ 1/8 

1280 

DOTTED  1/2 

1536 

WHOLE 

2048 

190 


PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


The  note  number  from  the  note  table  is  added  to  the  duration  above. 
Then  each  note  can  be  entered  using  only  one  number  which  is  decoded 
by  your  program.  This  is  only  one  method  of  coding  note  values.  You 
may  be  able  to  come  up  with  one  with  which  you  are  more  comfortable. 
The  formula  used  here  for  encoding  a note  is  as  follows: 

1)  The  duration  (number  of  1 / 1 6ths  of  a measure)  is  multiplied  by  8. 

2)  The  result  of  step  1 is  added  to  the  octave  you've  chosen  (0-7). 

3)  The  result  of  step  2 is  then  multiplied  by  16. 

4)  Add  your  note  choice  (0-11)  to  the  result  of  the  operation  in  step 
3. 

In  other  words: 


((((D*8)  + 0)  *16)  + N) 

Where  D = duration,  O = octave,  and  N = note 

A silence  is  obtained  by  using  the  negative  of  the  duration  number 
(number  of  1 / 1 6ths  of  a measure  * 128). 

CONTROLLING  MULTIPLE  VOICES 

Once  you  have  gotten  used  to  using  more  than  one  voice,  you  will  find 
that  the  timing  of  the  three  voices  needs  to  be  coordinated.  This  is  ac- 
complished in  this  program  by: 

1)  Divide  each  musical  measure  into  16  parts. 

2)  Store  the  events  that  occur  in  each  1 / 1 6th  measure  interval  in  three 
separate  arrays. 

The  high  and  low  frequency  bytes  are  calculated  by  dividing  the  fre- 
quencies of  the  highest  octave  by  two  (lines  180  and  190).  The 
waveform  control  byte  is  a start  signal  for  beginning  a note  or  continu- 
ing a note  that  is  already  playing.  It  is  a stop  signal  to  end  a note.  The 
waveform  choice  is  made  once  for  each  voice  in  line  40. 

Again,  this  is  only  one  way  to  control  multiple  voices.  You  may  come 
up  with  your  own  methods.  However,  you  should  now  be  able  to  take 
any  piece  of  sheet  music  and  figure  out  the  notes  for  all  three  voices. 


PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


191 


CHANGING  WAVEFORMS 


The  tonal  quality  of  a sound  is  called  the  timbre.  The  timbre  of  a 
sound  is  determined  primarily  by  its  "waveform."  If  you  remember  the 
example  of  throwing  a pebble  into  the  water  you  know  that  the  waves 
ripple  evenly  across  the  pond.  These  waves  almost  look  like  the  first 
sound  wave  we're  going  to  talk  about,  the  sinusoidal  wave,  or  sine 
wave  for  short  (shown  below). 


To  make  what  we're  talking  about  a bit  more  practical,  let's  go  back 
to  the  first  example  program  to  investigate  different  waveforms.  The 
reason  for  this  is  that  you  can  hear  the  changes  more  easily  using  only 
one  voice.  LOAD  the  first  music  program  that  you  typed  in  earlier,  from 
your  DATASSETTE™  or  disk,  and  RUN  it  again.  That  program  is  using  the 
sawtooth  waveform  (shown  here) 


from  the  6581  SID  chip's  sound  generating  device.  Try  changing  the  note 
start  number  in  line  70  from  33  to  17  and  the  note  stop  number  in  line  90 
from  32  to  16.  Your  program  should  now  look  like  this: 

192  PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


EXAMPLE  PROGRAM  3 (EXAMPLE  1 MODIFIED): 


5 5=54272 

1 0 " F0RL*ST0S+24  : F'OKEL  , 0 '•  NEXT 

20  POKES+5 , 9 '• POKES+S , 0 

30  POKES+24, 15 

40  README, LF, DR 

50  I FHF-C0THENEND 

60  POKES  + 1 , HF  POKES , LF 

70  F'0KES+4j  17 

80  F 0 R T -IT 0 D R : N E X T 

90  POKES +4 , 1 6 ■ FORT- 1 TO50 : NEXT 

100  GOT 040 

1 1 0 D ATA25 .177, 258 , 28 , 2 1 4 , 250 
1 20  DATR25 , 1 77 , 250 , 25 , 1 77 , 258 
1 30  D AT A25 , 177,1 25 , 28 , 2 1 4 , 1 25 
1 40  DRTA32 , 94 , 750 , 25 ,177, 250 
1 50  DAT A28 , 2 1 4 , 250 , 1 9 , 63 , 25© 

1 68  IiRTR  1 9 , 63 , 250 , 1 9 , 63 , 25© 

1 7©  DRTR2 1 , 1 54 , 63 , 24 , 63 , 63 
1 8©  DFITR25 , 1 77 , 250 , 24 , 63 , 1 25 
1 90  DATA 1 9 , 63 , 250 , - 1 , - 1 , - 1 


Now  RUN  the  program. 

Notice  how  the  sound  quality  is  different,  less  twangy,  more  hollow. 
That's  because  we  changed  the  sawtooth  waveform  into  a triangular 
waveform  (show  below). 


The  third  musical  waveform  is  called  a variable  pulse  wave  (shown 
below). 


PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


193 


It  is  a rectangular  wave  and  you  determine  the  length  of  the  pulse 
cycle  by  defining  the  proportion  of  the  wave  which  will  be  high.  This  is 
accomplished  for  voice  1 by  using  registers  2 and  3:  Register  2 is  the  low 
byte  of  the  pulse  width  (Lpw  = 0 through  255).  Register  3 is  the  high  4 
bits  (Hpw  = 0 through  15). 

Together  these  registers  specify  a 12-bit  number  for  your  pulse  width, 
which  you  can  determine  by  using  the  following  formula: 

PWn  = Hpw*256  + Lpw 

The  pulse  width  is  determined  by  the  following  equation: 

PW0Ut  = (PWn /40.95)  % 

When  PWn  has  a value  of  2048,  it  will  give  you  a square  wave.  That 
means  that  register  2 (Lpw)  = 0 and  register  3 (Hpw)  = 8. 

Now  try  adding  this  line  to  your  program: 

15  POKES +3,8:POKES +2,0 

Then  change  the  start  number  in  line  70  to  65  and  the  stop  number  in 
line  90  to  64,  and  RUN  the  program.  Now  change  the  high  pulse  width 
(register  3 in  line  15)  from  an  8 to  a 1.  Notice  how  dramatic  the  differ- 
ence in  sound  quality  is? 

The  last  waveform  available  to  you  is  white  noise  (shown  here). 


It  is  used  mostly  for  sound  effects  and  such.  To  hear  how  it  sounds,  try 
changing  the  start  number  in  line  70  to  129  and  the  stop  number  in  line 
90  to  128. 

UNDERSTANDING  WAVEFORMS 


When  a note  is  played,  it  consists  of  a sine  wave  oscillating  at  the 
fundamental  frequency  and  the  harmonics  of  that  wave. 


194  PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


The  fundamental  frequency  defines  the  overall  pitch  of  the  note. 
Harmonics  are  sine  waves  having  frequencies  which  are  integer  multi- 
ples of  the  fundamental  frequency.  A sound  wave  is  the  fundamental 
frequency  and  all  of  the  harmonics  it  takes  to  make  up  that  sound. 


In  musical  theory  let's  say  that  the  fundamental  frequency  is  harmonic 
number  1.  The  second  harmonic  has  a frequency  twice  the  fundamental 
frequency,  the  third  harmonic  is  three  times  the  fundamental  frequency, 
and  so  on.  The  amounts  of  each  harmonic  present  in  a note  give  it  its 
timbre. 

An  acoustic  instrument,  like  a guitar  or  a violin,  has  a very  compli- 
cated harmonic  structure.  In  fact,  the  harmonic  structure  may  vary  as  a 
single  note  is  played.  You  have  already  played  with  the  waveforms 
available  in  your  Commodore  music  synthesizer.  Now  let's  talk  about 
how  the  harmonics  work  with  the  triangular,  sawtooth,  and  rectangular 
waves. 

A triangular  wave  contains  only  odd  harmonics.  The  amount  of  each 
harmonic  present  is  proportional  to  the  reciprocal  of  the  square  of  the 
harmonic  number.  In  other  words  harmonic  number  3 is  1/9  quieter  than 
harmonic  number  1,  because  the  harmonic  3 squared  is  9 (3  X 3)  and 
the  reciprocal  of  9 is  1/9. 

As  you  can  see,  there  is  a similarity  in  shape  of  a triangular  wave  to  a 
sine  wave  oscillating  at  the  fundamental  frequency. 

Sawtooth  waves  contain  all  the  harmonics.  The  amount  of  each  har- 
monic present  is  proportional  to  the  reciprocal  of  the  harmonic  number. 
For  example,  harmonic  number  2 is  1/2  as  loud  as  harmonic  number  1. 

The  square  wave  contains  odd  harmonics  in  proportion  to  the  recip- 
rocal of  the  harmonic  number.  Other  rectangular  waves  have  varying 
harmonic  content.  By  changing  the  pulse  width,  the  timbre  of  the  sound 
of  a rectangular  wave  can  be  varied  tremendously. 


PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


195 


By  choosing  carefully  the  waveform  used,  you  can  start  with  a har- 
monic structure  that  looks  somewhat  like  the  sound  you  want.  To  refine 
the  sound,  you  can  add  another  aspect  of  sound  quality  available  on 
your  Commodore  64  called  filtering , which  well  discuss  later  in  this 
section. 


THE  ENVELOPE  GENERATOR 


The  volume  of  a musical  tone  changes  from  the  moment  you  first  hear 
it,  all  the  way  through  until  it  dies  out  and  you  can't  hear  it  anymore. 
When  a note  is  first  struck,  it  rises  from  zero  volume  to  its  peak  volume. 
The  rate  at  which  this  happens  is  called  the  ATTACK.  Then,  it  falls  from 
the  peak  to  some  middle-ranged  volume.  The  rate  at  which  the  fall  of 
the  note  occurs  is  called  the  DECAY.  The  mid-ranged  volume  itself  is 
called  the  SUSTAIN  level.  And  finally,  when  the  note  stops  playing,  it 
falls  from  the  SUSTAIN  level  to  zero  volume.  The  rate  at  which  it  falls  is 
called  the  RELEASE.  Here  is  a sketch  of  the  four  phases  of  a note: 


Each  of  the  items  mentioned  above  give  certain  qualities  and  restric- 
tions to  a note.  The  bounds  are  called  parameters. 

The  parameters  ATTACK/DECAY/SUSTAIN/RELEASE  and  collectively 
called  ADSR,  can  be  controlled  by  your  use  of  another  set  of  locations  in 
the  sound  generator  chip.  LOAD  your  first  example  program  again.  RUN 
it  again  and  remember  how  it  sounds.  Then,  try  changing  line  20  so  the 
program  is  like  this: 


196 


PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


EXAMPLE  PROGRAM  4 (EXAMPLE  1 MODIFIED): 


5 5=54272 

1 0 F0RL=ST0S+24 : POKEL , 0 : NEXT 
20  POKES +5 , 88 : POKES+6 , 1 95 
30  POKES+24, 15 
40  REflBHF,LF,DR 
50  I F H F < 0 T H E N E N B 
60  POKE 8+ 1,HF: POKES , LF 
70  FOKES+4  ••  33 
80  FORT=lTODR : NEXT 
90  POKES+4 , 32  *•  FORT*  1 T050  : NEXT 
100  GOT 040 

1 1 0 DAT R25 , 1 77 , 250 , 28 , 2 1 4 , 250 
1 20  DRTR25 ,177, 250 , 25 , 1 77 , 25© 
1 30  DRTR25 , 177,1 25 , 28 ,214,1 25 
1 40  D RTF! 3 2 , 94 , 750 , 25 , 1 77 , 250 
1 50  DRTR28 , 2 1 4 , 250 , 1 9 , 63 , 250 
1 6©  IiRTR  1 9 , 63 , 250 , 1 9 , 63 , 250 
1 70  DRTR2 1 , 1 54 , 63 , 24 , 63 , 63 
1 80  DRTR25 , 1 77 , 250 , 24 , 63 , 1 25 
1 90  BRTR 1 9 , 63 , 250 , - 1 , - 1 , - 1 


Registers  5 and  6 define  the  ADSR  for  voice  1 . The  ATTACK  is  the  high 
nybble  of  register  5.  Nybble  is  half  a byte,  in  other  words  the  lower  4 or 
higher  4 on/off  locations  (bits)  in. each  register.  DECAY  is  the  low  nybble. 
You  can  pick  any  number  0 through  15  for  ATTACK,  multiply  it  by  16  and 
add  to  any  number  0 through  15  for  DECAY.  The  values  that  correspond 
to  these  numbers  are  listed  below. 

SUSTAIN  level  is  the  high  nybble  of  register  6.  It  can  be  0 through  15. 
It  defines  the  proportion  of  the  peak  volume  that  the  SUSTAIN  level  will 
be.  RELEASE  rate  is  the  low  nybble  of  register  6. 


PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


197 


Here  are  the  meanings  of  the  values  for  ATTACK,  DECAY,  and  RE- 
LEASE: 


VALUE 

ATTACK  RATE  (TIME/CYCLE) 

DECAY/RELEASE  RATE  (TIME/CYCLE) 

0 

2 ms 

6 ms 

1 

8 ms 

24  ms 

2 

16  ms 

48  ms 

3 

24  ms 

72  ms 

4 

38  ms 

1 14  ms 

5 

56  ms 

168  ms 

6 

68  ms 

204  ms 

7 

80  ms 

240  ms 

8 

100  ms 

300  ms 

9 

250  ms 

750  ms 

10 

500  ms 

1.5  s 

11 

800  ms 

2.4  s 

12 

1 s 

3 s 

13 

3 s 

9 s 

14 

5 s 

15  s 

15 

8 s 

24  s 

Here  are  a few  sample  settings  to  try  in  your  example  program.  Try 
these  and  a few  of  your  own.  The  variety  of  sounds  you  can  produce  is 
astounding!  For  a violin  type  sound,  try  changing  line  20  to  read: 

20  POKES +5, 88: POKES +6, 89: REM  A=5;D=8;S=5;R=9 

Change  the  waveform  to  triangle  and  get  a xylophone  type  sound  by 
using  these  lines: 

20  POKES+5,9:POKES+6,9:REM  A=0;D=9;S=0;R=9 
70  POKES+4,17 

90  POKES+4,16:  FORT  =lTO50: NEXT 


198  PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


Change  the  waveform  to  square  and  try  a piano  type  sound  with  these 
lines: 


15  POKES +3,8: POKES +2,0 

20  POKES +5,9: POKES +6,0:  REM  A=0;D=9;S=0;R=0 
70  POKES+4,65 

90  POKES+4,64:FORT=lTO50:NEXT 


The  most  exciting  sounds  are  those  unique  to  the  music  synthesizer 
itself,  ones  that  do  not  attempt  to  mimic  acoustic  instruments.  For 
example  try: 


20  POKES +5, 144: POKES +6,243: REM  A=9;D=0;  S = 15;R=3 


FILTERING 


The  harmonic  content  of  a waveform  can  be  changed  by  using  a 
filter.  The  SID  chip  is  equipped  with  three  types  of  filtering.  They  can  be 
used  separately  or  in  combination  with  one  another.  Let's  go  back  to  the 
sample  program  you've  been  using  to  play  with  a simple  example  that 
uses  a filter.  There  are  several  filter  controls  to  set. 

You  add  line  1 5 in  the  program  to  set  the  cutoff  frequency  of  the  filter. 
The  cutoff  frequency  is  the  reference  point  for  the  filter.  You  SET  the  high 
and  low  frequency  cutoff  points  in  registers  21  and  22.  To  turn  ON  the 
filter  for  voice  1,  POKE  register  23. 

Next  change  line  30  to  show  that  a high-pass  filter  will  be  used  (see 
the  SID  register  map). 


PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


199 


EXAMPLE  PROGRAM  5 (EXAMPLE  1 MODIFIED): 


3=54272 

1 8 ~ FQRL*ST0S+24  : POKEL,  0 • NEXT 

1 5 POKES+22 , 1 28  • POKES+2 1,0:  POKES+23 , 1 

20  POKES+5 , 9 ■ POKES+6 , 8 

30  POKES+24,79 

40  REflDHF , LF .«  DR 

50  IFHFC0THENENH 

60  POKES* 1 , HF ; POKES , LF 

70  POKES+4,33 

80  FORT  ==  1 TQBR : NEXT 

90  POKES+4 , 32 : FORT* 1 TO50 : NEXT 

100  GOTO 40 

1 1 0 HRTR25 , 1 77 , 250 , 28,21 4 , 250 
1 20  HRTR25 , 1 77 , 250 , 25 , 1 77 , 250 
1 30  DRTR25 , 177,1 25 , 28 ,214,1 25 
1 40  HRTR32 , 94 , 750 , 25 , 1 77 , 250 
1 50  DRTR28 ,214, 250 ,19, 63 , 250 
1 60  DRTR 1 9 , 63 , 250 ,19, 63 , 25G 
1 70  DRTR2 1 , 1 54 , 63 , 24 , 63 , 63 
1 80  HRTR25 , 1 77 , 250 , 24 , 63 , 1 25 
190  HATR19, 63, 250,-1, -1,-1 


Try  RUNning  the  program  now.  Notice  the  lower  tones  have  had  their 
volume  cut  down.  It  makes  the  overall  quality  of  the  note  sound  tinny. 
This  is  because  you  are  using  a high-pass  filter  which  attenuates  (cuts 
down  the  level  of)  frequencies  below  the  specified  cutoff  frequency. 

There  are  three  types  of  filters  in  your  Commodore  computer's  SID 
chip.  We  have  been  using  the  high-pass  filter.  It  will  pass  all  the  fre- 
quencies at  or  above  the  cutoff,  while  attenuating  the  frequencies  below 
the  cutoff. 


The  SID  chip  also  has  a low-pass  filter.  As  its  name  implies,  this  filter 
will  pass  the  frequencies  below  cutoff  and  attenuate  those  above. 


200  PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


Finally,  the  chip  is  equipped  with  a bandpass  filter,  which  passes  a 
narrow  band  of  frequencies  around  the  cutoff,  and  attenuates  all 
others. 


The  high-  and  low-pass  filters  can  be  combined  to  form  a notch  reject 
filter  which  passes  frequencies  away  from  the  cutoff  while  attenuating 
at  the  cutoff  frequency. 


CUTOFF 


FREQUENCY 


PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


201 


Register  24  determines  which  type  filter  you  want  to  use.  This  is  in 
addition  to  register  24's  function  as  the  overall  volume  control.  Bit  6 
controls  the  high-pass  filter  (0  = off,  1 = on),  bit  5 is  the  bandpass 
filter,  and  bit  4 is  the  low-pass  filter.  The  low  3 bits  of  the  cutoff  fre- 
quency are  determined  by  register  21  (Lcf)  (Let  = 0 through  7).  While  the 
8 bits  of  the  high  cutoff  frequency  are  determined  by  register  22  (Hcf) 
(Hcf  = 0 through  255). 

Through  careful  use  of  filtering,  you  can  change  the  harmonic  struc- 
ture of  any  waveform  to  get  just  the  sound  you  want.  In  addition,  chang- 
ing the  filtering  of  a sound  as  it  goes  through  the  ADSR  phases  of  its  life 
can  produce  interesting  effects. 


ADVANCED  TECHNIQUES 


The  SID  chip's  parameters  can  be  changed  dynamically  during  a note 
or  sound  to  create  many  interesting  and  fun  effects.  In  order  to  make 
this  easy  to  do,  digitized  outputs  from  oscillator  three  and  envelope 
generator  three  are  available  for  you  in  registers  27  and  28,  respec- 
tively. 

The  output  of  oscillator  3 (register  27)  is  directly  related  to  the 
waveform  selected.  If  you  choose  the  sawtooth  waveform  of  oscillator  3, 
this  register  will  present  a series  of  numbers  incremented  (increased 
step  by  step)  from  0 to  255  at  a rate  determined  by  the  frequency  of 
oscillator  3.  If  you  choose  the  triangle  waveform,  the  output  will  incre- 
ment from  0 up  to  255,  then  decrement  (decrease  step  by  step)  back 
down  to  0.  If  you  choose  the  pulse  wave,  the  output  will  jump  back- 
and-forth  between  0 and  255.  Finally,  choosing  the  noise  waveform  will 
give  you  a series  of  random  numbers.  When  oscillator  3 is  used  for 
modulation,  you  usually  do  NOT  want  to  hear  its  output.  Setting  bit  7 of 
register  24  turns  the  audio  output  of  voice  3 off.  Register  27  always 
reflects  the  changing  output  of  the  oscillator  and  is  not  affected  in  any 
way  by  the  envelope  (ADSR)  generator. 


202 


PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


Register  25  gives  you  access  to  the  output  of  the  envelope  generator 
of  oscillator  3.  It  functions  in  much  the  same  fashion  that  the  output  of 
oscillator  3 does.  The  oscillator  must  be  turned  on  to  produce  any  output 
from  this  register. 

Vibrato  (a  rapid  variation  in  frequency)  can  be  achieved  by  adding 
the  output  of  oscillator  3 to  the  frequency  of  another  oscillator.  Example 
Program  6 illustrates  this  idea. 


EXAMPLE  PROGRAM  6: 


10  3=54272 

20  F0RL-0TO24 : POKES+L , 0 : NEXT 
30  POKES+3, 3 

40  POKES+5 ,41: FOKES+6 , S3 

50  F'OKES+14,  117 

60  P0KE8+18, 16 

70  POKES+24, 143 

80  REflBFR, DR 

90  I FFR=0THENENIi 

100  POKES+4, 65 

110  F0RT=1T0DR#2 

120  FQ=FR+PEEK  < S+27  > /2 

1 30  HF=  I NT  C FQ/2'56  } : LF=FQflND255 

1 40  POKES+0 , LF : POKES+ 1 , HF 

150  NEXT 

160  POKES+4, 64 

170  GOTO80 

500  DRTR43 17,2,5103,2,5407,2 
510  BRTR8583, 4, 5407, 2, 8583, 4 
520  DRTR5407 , 4 , 8583 ,12, 9634 , 2 
530  IiflTfl  1 0207 , 2 , 1 08 14,2,  8583 , 2 
540  DRTR9S34 ,4,10814,2, 8583 . 2 
550  IIRTR9634 , 4 , 8533 , 1 2 
560  DRTR0 , @ 


Here  is  a line-by-line  explanation  of  Example  Program  6: 


PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC  203 


LINE-BY-LINE  EXPLANATION  OF  EXAMPLE  PROGRAM  6: 


Lines(s) 

Description 

10 

20 

30 

40 

Set  S to  beginning  of  sound  chip. 

Clear  all  sound  chip  locations. 

Set  high  pulse  width  for  voice  1. 

Set  Attack/Decay  for  voice  1 (A=2,  D = 9). 

Set  Sustain/Release  for  voice  1 (S  = 5,  R = 9). 

50 

60 

70 

80 

90 

100 

110 

120 

130 

140 

150 

160 

170 

500-550 

560 

Set  low  frequency  for  voice  3. 

Set  triangle  waveform  for  voice  3. 

Set  volume  15,  turn  off  audio  output  of  voice  3. 

Read  frequency  and  duration  of  note. 

If  frequency  equals  zero,  stop. 

POKE  start  pulse  waveform  control  voice  1. 

Start  timing  loop  for  duration. 

Get  new  frequency  using  oscillator  3 output. 

Get  high  and  low  frequency. 

POKE  high  and  low  frequency  for  voice  1. 

End  of  timing  loop. 

POKE  stop  pulse  waveform  control  voice  1 . 

Go  back  for  next  note. 

Frequencies  and  durations  for  song. 

Zeros  signal  end  of  song. 

A wide  variety  of  sound  effects  can  also  be  achieved  using  dynamic 
effects.  For  example,  the  following  siren  program  dynamically  changes 
the  frequency  output  of  oscillator  1 when  it's  based  on  the  output  of 
oscillator  3's  triangular  wave: 


204  PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


EXAMPLE  PROGRAM  7: 


10  8=54272 

20  FORL  -0T 024  •'  PGKES+L ..  0 : NEXT 

30  POKES* 14, 5 

40  POKES* 18, IS 

50  POKES* 3 , 1 

60  POKES+24, 143 

70  POKES *6, 240 

80  POKES* 4 .•  65 

90  FR=5389 

100  FORT=1TO200 

1 1 0 FQ=FR+PEEK < S+27 > % 3 ■ 5 

1 20  HF= I NT  < FQ/256 > : LF»FQ-HF*256 

1 30  POKES* 0 , LF : POKES* 1 . HF 

140  NEXT 

150  POKES+24,0 


Here  is  a line-by-line  explanation  of  Example  Program  7: 
LINE-BY-LINE  EXPLANATION  OF  EXAMPLE  PROGRAM  7: 


Line(s) 

Description 

10 

Set  S to  start  of  sound  chip. 

20 

Clear  sound  chip  registers. 

30 

Set  low  frequency  of  voice  3. 

40 

Set  triangular  waveform  voice  3. 

50 

Set  high  pulse  width  for  voice  1. 

60 

Set  volume  15,  turn  off  audio  output  of  voice  3. 

70 

Set  Sustain/Release  for  voice  1 (S=15,  R = 0). 

80 

POKE  start  pulse  waveform  control  voice  1. 

90 

Set  lowest  frequency  for  siren. 

100 

Begin  timing  loop. 

no 

Get  new  frequency  using  output  of  oscillator  3. 

120 

Get  high  and  low  frequencies. 

130 

POKE  high  and  low  frequencies  for  voice  1. 

140 

End  timing  loop. 

150 

Turn  off  volume. 

PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC  205 


The  noise  waveform  can  be  used  to  provide  a wide  range  of  sound 
effects.  This  example  mimics  a hand  clap  using  a filtered  noise 
waveform: 

EXAMPLE  PROGRAM  8: 


10  8*54272 

20  FQRL-0TQ24 : POKES+L , 0 : NEXT 
30  POKES+0  .•  240  : P0KES+ 1 , 33 
40  POKES+5 8 
50  POKES+22, 104 
60  PQKES+23, 1 
70  POKES+24 7 S' 

.30  FORM- 1 TO  1 5 
90  POKES+4, 129 

1 00  FORT- 1 TO250 : NEXT : POKES+4 , 1 28 
1 1 0 FORT* 1 TO30 : NEXT : NEXT 
120  POKES+24, 0 


Here  is  a line-by-line  explanation  of  Example  Program  8: 

LINE-BY-LINE  EXPLANATION  OF  EXAMPLE  PROGRAM  8: 


Line(s) 

Description 

10 

Set  S to  start  of  sound  chip. 

20 

Clear  all  sound  chip  registers. 

30 

Set  high  and  low  frequencies  for  voice  1. 

40 

Set  Attack/Decay  for  voice  1 (A=0,  D = 8). 

50 

Set  high  cutoff  frequency  for  filter. 

60 

Turn  on  filter  for  voice  1 . 

70 

Set  volume  15,  high-pass  filter. 

80 

Count  15  claps. 

90 

Set  start  noise  waveform  control. 

100 

Wait,  then  set  stop  noise  waveform  control. 

110 

Wait,  then  start  next  clap. 

120 

Turn  off  volume. 

206  PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


SYNCHRONIZATION  AND 
RING  MODULATION 


The  6581  SID  chip  lets  you  create  more  complex  harmonic  structures 
through  synchronization  or  ring  modulation  of  two  voices. 

The  process  of  synchronization  is  basically  a logical  ANDing  of  two 
wave  forms.  When  either  is  zero,  the  output  is  zero.  The  following 
example  uses  this  process  to  create  an  imitation  of  a mosquito: 

EXAMPLE  PROGRAM  9: 

10  8=54272 

20  FORL~0TQ24 : POKES+L, 0 : NEXT 

30  POKES+ 1,100 

40  POKES+5  .>219 

50  POKES+ 1 5 ..  28 

60  POKES +24 15 

70  POKES +4..  19 

80  FORT® 1 T 050 00 : NEXT 

90  POKES+4,18 

1 00  FORT® 1 TO 1 000 : NEXT  : POKES+24 , 0 


Here  is  a line-by-line  explanation  of  Example  Program  9: 


LINE-BY-LINE  EXPLANATION  OF  EXAMPLE  PROGRAM  9: 


Line(s) 

Description 

10 

Set  S to  start  of  sound  chip. 

20 

Clear  sound  chip  registers. 

30 

Set  high  frequency  voice  1. 

40 

Set  Attack/Decay  for  voice  1 (A=13,  D=ll). 

50 

Set  high  frequency  voice  3. 

60 

Set  volume  15. 

70 

Set  start  triangle,  sync  waveform  control  for  voice  1 . 

80 

Timing  loop. 

90 

Set  stop  triangle,  sync  waveform  control  for  voice  1. 

100 

Wait,  then  turn  off  volume. 

The  synchronization  feature  is  enabled  (turned  on)  in  line  70,  where 
bits  0,1,  and  4 of  register  4 are  set.  Bit  1 enables  the  syncing  function 
between  voice  1 and  voice  3.  Bits  0 and  4 have  their  usual  functions  of 
gating  voice  1 and  setting  the  triangular  waveform. 


PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC  207 


Ring  modulation  (accomplished  for  voice  1 by  setting  bit  3 of  register 
4 in  line  70  of  the  program  below)  replaces  the  triangular  output  of 
oscillator  1 with  a "ring  modulated"  combination  of  oscillators  1 and  3. 
This  produces  non-harmonic  overtone  structures  for  use  in  mimicking  bell 
or  gong  sounds.  This  program  produces  a clock  chime  imitation: 

EXAMPLE  PROGRAM  10: 

10  5=54272 

20  FORL:==0TO24  : P0KES+L , 0 : NEXT 

3©  POKES* 1, 130 

40  POKES +5  .•  9 

50  POKES* 15, 30 

60  POKES+24,15 

70  FORL* 1 TO 1 2 : PQKES+4 , 2 1 

80  FORT*  1 TO  1 000  : NEXT  : POKES+4  .<  28 

90  FORT* 1 TO 1 008 : NEXT : NEXT 


Here  is  a line-by-line  explanation  of  Example  Program  10: 


LINE-BY-LINE  EXPLANATION  OF  EXAMPLE  PROGRAM  10: 


Line(s) 

Description 

10 

Set  S to  start  of  sound  chip. 

20 

Clear  sound  chip  registers. 

30 

Set  high  frequency  for  voice  1. 

40 

Set  Attack/Decay  for  voice  1 (A=0,  D = 9). 

50 

Set  high  frequency  for  voice  3. 

60 

Set  volume  15. 

70 

Count  number  of  dings,  set  start  triangle,  ring  mod 

waveform  control  voice  1 . 

80 

Timing  loop,  set  stop  triangle,  ring  mod. 

90 

Timing  loop,  next  ding. 

The  effects  available  through  the  use  of  the  parameters  of  your 
Commodore  64's  SID  chip  are  numerous  and  varied.  Only  through  ex- 
perimentation on  your  own  will  you  fully  appreciate  the  capabilities  of 
your  machine.  The  examples  in  this  section  of  the  Programmer's  Refer- 
ence Guide  merely  scratch  the  surface. 

Watch  for  the  book  MAKING  MUSIC  ON  YOUR  COMMODORE  COM- 
PUTER for  everything  from  simple  fun  and  games  to  professional-type 
musical  instruction. 


208  PROGRAMMING  SOUND  AND  MUSIC 


CHAPTER 


5 

BASIC  TO 
MACHINE 
LANGUAGE 

• What  Is  Machine  Language? 

• How  Do  You  Write  Machine 
Language  Programs? 

• Hexadecimal  Notation 

• Addressing  Modes 

• Indexing 

• Subroutines 

• Useful  Tips  for  the  Beginner 

• Approaching  a Large  Task 

• MCS6510  Microprocessor  Instruction 
Set 

• Memory  Management  on  the 
Commodore  64 

• The  KERNAL 

• KERNAL  Power-Up  Activities 

• Using  Machine  Language  From 
BASIC 

• Commodore  64  Memory  Map 


209 


WHAT  IS  MACHINE  LANGUAGE? 

At  the  heart  of  every  microcomputer,  is  a central  microprocessor.  It's 
a very  special  microchip  which  is  the  "brain"  of  the  computer.  The 
Commodore  64  is  no  exception.  Every  microprocessor  understands  its 
own  language  of  instructions.  These  instructions  are  called  machine  lan- 
guage instructions.  To  put  it  more  precisely,  machine  language  is  the 
ONLY  programming  language  that  your  Commodore  64  understands.  It 
is  the  NATIVE  language  of  the  machine. 

If  machine  language  is  the  only  language  that  the  Commodore  64 
understands,  then  how  does  it  understand  the  CBM  BASIC  programming 
language?  CBM  BASIC  is  NOT  the  machine  language  of  the  Commodore 
64.  What,  then,  makes  the  Commodore  64  understand  CBM  BASIC  in- 
structions  like  PRINT  and  GOTO? 

To  answer  this  question,  you  must  first  see  what  happens  inside  your 
Commodore  64.  Apart  from  the  microprocessor  which  is  the  brain  of  the 
Commodore  64,  there  is  a machine  language  program  which  is  stored  in 
a special  type  of  memory  so  that  it  can't  be  changed.  And,  more  impor- 
tantly, it  does  not  disappear  when  the  Commodore  64  is  turned  off, 
unlike  a program  that  you  may  have  written.  This  machine  language 
program  is  called  the  OPERATING  SYSTEM  of  the  Commodore  64.  Your 
Commodore  64  knows  what  to  do  when  it's  turned  on  because  its 
OPERATING  SYSTEM  (program)  is  automatically  "RUN." 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


The  OPERATING  SYSTEM  is  in  charge  of  "organizing"  all  the  memory 
in  your  machine  for  various  tasks.  It  also  looks  at  what  characters  you 
type  on  the  keyboard  and  puts  them  onto  the  screen,  plus  a whole 
number  of  other  functions.  The  OPERATING  SYSTEM  can  be  thought  of 
as  the  "intelligence  and  personality"  of  the  Commodore  64  (or  any  com- 
puter for  that  matter).  So  when  you  turn  on  your  Commodore  64,  the 
OPERATING  SYSTEM  takes  control  of  your  machine,  and  after  it  has 
done  its  housework,  it  then  says: 

READY. 


The  OPERATING  SYSTEM  of  the  Commodore  64  then  allows  you  to 
type  on  the  keyboard,  and  use  the  built-in  SCREEN  EDITOR  on  the  Com- 
modore 64.  The  SCREEN  EDITOR  allows  you  to  move  the  cursor,  DELete, 
INSert,  etc.,  and  is,  in  fact,  only  one  part  of  the  operating  system  that  is 
built  in  for  your  convenience. 

All  of  the  commands  that  are  available  in  CBM  BASIC  are  simply 
recognized  by  another  huge  machine  language  program  built  into  your 
Commodore  64.  This  huge  program  "RUNs"  the  appropriate  piece  of 
machine  language  depending  on  which  CBM  BASIC  command  is  being 
executed.  This  program  is  called  the  BASIC  INTERPRETER,  because  it 
interprets  each  command,  one  by  one,  unless  it  encounters  a command 
it  does  not  understand,  and  then  the  familiar  message  appears: 

?SYNTAX  ERROR 

READY. 


WHAT  DOES  MACHINE  CODE  LOOK  LIKE? 

You  should  be  familiar  with  the  PEEK  and  POKE  commands  in  the  CBM 
BASIC  language  for  changing  memory  locations.  You've  probably  used 
them  for  graphics  on  the  screen,  and  for  sound  effects.  Each  memory 
location  has  its  own  number  which  identifies  it.  This  number  is  known  as 
the  "address"  of  a memory  location.  If  you  imagine  the  memory  in  the 
Commodore  64  as  a street  of  buildings,  then  the  number  on  each  door 
is,  of  course,  the  address.  Now  let's  look  at  which  parts  of  the  street  are 
used  for  what  purposes. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


211 


SIMPLE  MEMORY  MAP  OF  THE  COMMODORE  64 


ADDRESS 

DESCRIPTION 

0 & 1 

— 6510  Registers. 

2 

up  to: 

1023 

— Start  of  memory. 

— Memory  used  by  the  operating  system. 

1024 
up  to: 
2039 

— Screen  memory. 

2040 

up  to: 
2047 

— SPRITE  pointers. 

2048 
up  to: 

40959 

— This  is  YOUR  memory.  This  is  where  your  BASIC  or 
machine  language  programs,  or  both,  are  stored. 

40960 

up  to: 
49151 

— 8K  CBM  BASIC  Interpreter. 

49152 
up  to: 
53247 

— Special  programs  RAM  area. 

53248 

up  to: 
53294 

— VIC-II. 

54272 

up  to: 
55295 

— SID  Registers. 

55296 
up  to: 

56296 

— Color  RAM. 

56320 
up  to: 
57343 

— I/O  Registers.  (6526's) 

57344 
up  to: 
65535 

— 

— 8K  CBM  KERNAL  Operating  System. 

212  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


If  you  don't  understand  what  the  description  of  each  part  of  memory 
means  right  now,  this  will  become  clear  from  other  parts  of  this  manual. 

Machine  language  programs  consist  of  instructions  which  may  or  may 
not  have  operands  (parameters)  associated  with  them.  Each  instruction 
takes  up  one  memory  location,  and  any  operand  is  contained  in  one  or 
two  locations  following  the  instruction. 

In  your  BASIC  programs,  words  like  PRINT  and  GOTO  do,  in  fact,  only 
take  up  one  memory  location,  rather  than  one  for  each  character  of  the 
word.  The  contents  of  the  location  that  represents  a particular  BASIC 
keyword  is  called  a token.  In  machine  language,  there  are  different 
tokens  for  different  instructions,  which  also  take  up  just  one  byte  (mem- 
ory location  = byte). 

Machine  language  instructions  are  very  simple.  Therefore,  each  indi- 
vidual instruction  cannot  achieve  a great  deal.  Machine  language  in- 
structions either  change  the  contents  of  a memory  location,  or  change 
one  of  the  internal  registers  (special  storage  locations)  inside  the  micro- 
processor. The  internal  registers  form  the  very  basis  of  machine  lan- 
guage. 

THE  REGISTERS  INSIDE  THE  6510  MICROPROCESSOR 

THE  ACCUMULATOR 

This  is  THE  most  important  register  in  the  microprocessor.  Various  ma- 
chine language  instructions  allow  you  to  copy  the  contents  of  a memory 
location  into  the  accumulator,  copy  the  contents  of  the  accumulator  into 
a memory  location,  modify  the  contents  of  the  accumulator  or  some 
other  register  directly,  without  affecting  any  memory.  And  the  ac- 
cumulator is  the  only  register  that  has  instructions  for  performing  math. 

THE  X INDEX  REGISTER 

This  is  a very  important  register.  There  are  instructions  for  nearly  all  of 
the  transformations  you  can  make  to  the  accumulator.  But  there  are 
other  instructions  for  things  that  only  the  X register  can  do.  Various  ma- 
chine language  instructions  allow  you  to  copy  the  contents  of  a memory 
location  into  the  X register,  copy  the  contents  of  the  X register  into  a 
memory  location,  and  modify  the  contents  of  the  X,  or  some  other  regis- 
ter directly. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


213 


THE  Y INDEX  REGISTER 


This  is  a very  important  register.  There  are  instructions  for  nearly  all  of 
the  transformations  you  can  make  to  the  accumulator,  and  the  X regis- 
ter. But  there  are  other  instructions  for  things  that  only  the  Y register  can 
do.  Various  machine  language  instructions  allow  you  to  copy  the  con- 
tents of  a memory  location  into  the  Y register,  copy  the  contents  of  the  Y 
register  into  a memory  location,  and  modify  the  contents  of  the  Y,  or 
some  other  register  directly. 

THE  STATUS  REGISTER 

This  register  consists  of  eight  "flags"  (a  flag  = something  that  indi- 
cates whether  something  has,  or  has  not  occurred). 

THE  PROGRAM  COUNTER 

This  contains  the  address  of  the  current  machine  language  instruction 
being  executed.  Since  the  operating  system  is  always  "RUN"ning  in  the 
Commodore  64  (or,  for  that  matter,  any  computer),  the  program  counter 
is  always  changing.  It  could  only  be  stopped  by  halting  the  microproces- 
sor in  some  way. 

THE  STACK  POINTER 

This  register  contains  the  location  of  the  first  empty  place  on  the  stack. 
The  stack  is  used  for  temporary  storage  by  machine  language  pro- 
grams, and  by  the  computer. 

THE  INPUT/OUTPUT  PORT 

This  register  appears  at  memory  locations  0 (for  the  DATA  DIRECTION 
REGISTER)  and  1 (for  the  actual  PORT).  It  is  an  8-bit  input/output  port. 
On  the  Commodore  64  this  register  is  used  for  memory  management,  to 
allow  the  chip  to  control  more  than  64K  of  RAM  and  ROM  memory. 

The  details  of  these  registers  are  not  given  here.  They  are  explained 
as  the  principles  needed  to  explain  them  are  explained. 


HOW  DO  YOU  WRITE  MACHINE  LAN- 
GUAGE PROGRAMS? 


Since  machine  language  programs  reside  in  memory,  and  there  is  no 
facility  in  your  Commodore  64  for  writing  and  editing  machine  language 


214  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


programs,  you  must  use  either  a program  to  do  this,  or  write  for  yourself 
a BASIC  program  that  "allows"  you  to  write  machine  language. 

The  most  common  methods  used  to  write  machine  language  pro- 
grams are  assembler  progams.  These  packages  allow  you  to  write  ma- 
chine language  instructions  in  a standardized  mnemonic  format,  which 
makes  the  machine  language  program  a lot  more  readable  than  a 
stream  of  numbers!  Let's  review:  A program  that  allows  you  to  write 
machine  language  programs  in  mnemonic  format  is  called  an  assem- 
bler. Incidentally,  a program  that  displays  a machine  language  pro- 
gram in  mnemonic  format  is  called  a disassembler.  Available  for  your 
Commodore  64  is  a machine  language  monitor  cartridge  (with  assem- 
bler/ disassembler,  etc.)  made  by  Commodore: 

64MON 

The  64MON  cartridge  available  from  your  local  dealer,  is  a program 
that  allows  you  to  escape  from  the  world  of  CBM  BASIC,  into  the  land  of 
machine  language.  It  can  display  the  contents  of  the  internal  registers  in 
the  6510  microprocessor,  and  it  allows  you  to  display  portions  of  mem- 
ory, and  change  them  on  the  screen,  using  the  screen  editor.  It  also  has 
a built-in  assembler  and  disassembler,  as  well  as  many  other  features 
that  allow  you  to  write  and  edit  machine  language  programs  easily.  You 
don't  HAVE  to  use  an  assembler  to  write  machine  language,  but  the  task 
is  considerably  easier  with  it.  If  you  wish  to  write  machine  language 
programs,  it  is  strongly  suggested  that  you  purchase  an  assembler  of 
some  sort.  Without  an  assembler  you  will  probably  have  to  "POKE"  the 
machine  language  program  into  memory,  which  is  totally  unadvisable. 
This  manual  will  give  its  examples  in  the  format  that  64MON  uses,  from 
now  on.  Nearly  all  assembler  formats  are  the  same,  therefore  the  ma- 
chine language  examples  shown  will  almost  certainly  be  compatible 
with  any  assembler.  But  before  explaining  any  of  the  other  features  of 
64MON,  the  hexadecimal  numbering  system  must  be  explained. 


HEXADECIMAL  NOTATION 


Hexadecimal  notation  is  used  by  most  machine  language  program- 
mers when  they  talk  about  a number  or  address  in  a machine  language 
program. 

Some  assemblers  let  you  refer  to  addresses  and  numbers  in  decimal 
(base  10),  binary  (base  2),  or  even  octal  (base  8)  as  well  as  hexadeci- 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


215 


mal  (base  16)  (or  just  "hex"  as  most  people  say).  These  assemblers  do 
the  conversions  for  you. 

Hexadecimal  probably  seems  a little  hard  to  grasp  at  first,  but  like 
most  things,  it  won't  take  long  to  master  with  practice. 

By  looking  at  decimal  (base  10)  numbers,  you  can  see  that  each  digit 
falls  somewhere  in  the  range  between  zero  and  a number  equal  to  the 
base  less  one  (e.g.,  9).  THIS  IS  TRUE  OF  ALL  NUMBER  BASES.  Binary 
(base  2)  numbers  have  digits  ranging  from  zero  to  one  (which  is  one  less 
than  the  base).  Similarly,  hexadecimal  numbers  should  have  digits  rang- 
ing from  zero  to  fifteen,  but  we  do  not  have  any  single  digit  figures  for 
the  numbers  ten  to  fifteen,  so  the  first  six  letters  of  the  alphabet  are 
used  instead: 


DECIMAL 

HEXADECIMAL 

BINARY 

0 

0 

00000000 

1 

1 

00000001 

2 

2 

00000010 

3 

3 

00000011 

4 

4 

00000100 

5 

5 

00000101 

6 

6 

00000110 

7 

7 

00000111 

8 

8 

00001000 

9 

9 

00001001 

10 

A 

00001010 

11 

B 

00001011 

12 

C 

00001100 

13 

D 

00001101 

14 

E 

00001 1 10 

15 

F 

00001111 

16 

10 

00010000 

216  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


Let's  look  at  it  another  way;  here's  an  example  of  how  a base  10 
(decimal  number)  is  constructed: 

Base  raised  by 

increasing  powers:  ...  103  1 02  1 01  1 0° 

Equals:  1000  100  10  1 

Consider  4569  (base  10)  4 5 6 9 

= (4  X 1 000)  + (5  X 1 00)  + (6X  1 0)  + 9 


Now  look  at  an  example  of  how  a base  16  (hexadecimal  number)  is 
constructed: 

Base  raised  by 

increasing  powers:  ...  163  162  161  16° 

Equals:  4096  256  16  1 

Consider  11 D9  (base  16)  1 1 D 9 

= 1 X4096+ 1X256+ 13X16+9 

Therefore,  4569  (base  10)  = 1 1 D9  (base  16) 

The  range  for  addressable  memory  locations  is  0-65535  (as  was 
stated  earlier).  This  range  is  therefore  0-FFFF  in  hexadecimal  notation. 

Usually  hexadecimal  numbers  are  prefixed  with  a dollar  sign  ($).  This 
is  to  distinguish  them  from  decimal  numbers.  Let's  look  at  some  "hex" 
numbers,  using  64MON,  by  displaying  the  contents  of  some  memory  by 
typing: 


SYS  8*4096  (or  SYS  12*4096) 

B* 

PC  SR  AC  XR  YR  SP 

.;  0401  32  04  5E  00  F6  (these  may  be  different) 


Then  if  you  type  in: 


.M  0000  0020  (and  press 


RETURN 


you  will  see  rows  of  9 hex  numbers.  The  first  4-digit  number  is  the  ad- 
dress of  the  first  byte  of  memory  being  shown  in  that  row,  and  the  other 
eight  numbers  are  the  actual  contents  of  the  memory  locations  begin- 
ning at  that  start  address. 

You  should  really  try  to  learn  to  "think"  in  hexadecimal.  It's  not  too 
difficult,  because  you  don't  have  to  think  about  converting  it  back  into 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


217 


decimal.  For  example,  if  you  said  that  a particular  value  is  stored  at 
$14ED  instead  of  5357,  it  shouldn't  make  any  difference. 

YOUR  FIRST  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  INSTRUCTION 

LDA  — LOAD  THE  ACCUMULATOR 

In  6510  assembly  language,  mnemonics  are  always  three  characters. 
LDA  represents  "load  accumulator  with  . . . ,"  and  what  the  ac- 
cumulator should  be  loaded  with  is  decided  by  the  parameter(s)  asso- 
ciated with  that  instruction.  The  assembler  knows  which  token  is  repre- 
sented by  each  mnemonic,  and  when  it  "assembles"  an  instruction,  it 
simply  puts  into  memory  (at  whatever  address  has  been  specified),  the 
token,  and  what  parameters,  are  given.  Some  assemblers  give  error 
messages,  or  warnings  when  you  try  to  assemble  something  that  either 
the  assembler,  or  the  6510  microprocessor,  cannot  do. 

If  you  put  a "#"  symbol  in  front  of  the  parameter  associated  with  the 
instruction,  this  means  that  you  want  the  register  specified  in  the  instruc- 
tion to  be  loaded  with  the  "value"  after  the  "#."  For  example: 

LDA  #$05 

This  instruction  will  put  $05  (decimal  5)  into  the  accumulator  register. 
The  assembler  will  put  into  the  specified  address  for  this  instruction,  $A9 
(which  is  the  token  for  this  particular  instruction,  in  this  mode),  and  it  will 
put  $05  into  the  next  location  after  the  location  containing  the  instruction 
($A9). 

If  the  parameter  to  be  used  by  an  instruction  has  "#"  before  it;  i.e., 
the  parameter  is  a "value,"  rather  than  the  contents  of  a memory  loca- 
tion, or  another  register,  the  instruction  is  said  to  be  in  the  "immediate" 
mode.  To  put  this  into  perspective,  let's  compare  this  with  another 
mode: 

If  you  want  to  put  the  contents  of  memory  location  $102E  into  the 
accumulator,  you're  using  the  "absolute"  mode  of  instruction: 

LDA  $1 02E 

The  assembler  can  distinguish  between  the  two  different  modes  because 
the  latter  does  not  have  a "#"  before  the  parameter.  The  6510  micro- 
processor can  distinguish  between  the  immediate  mode,  and  the  abso- 
lute mode  of  the  LDA  instruction,  because  they  have  slightly  different 
tokens.  LDA  (immediate)  has  $A9  as  its  token,  and  LDA  (absolute),  has 
$AD  as  its  token. 


218 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


The  mnemonic  representing  an  instruction  usually  implies  what  it 
does.  For  instance,  if  we  consider  another  instruction,  LDX,  what  do  you 
think  this  does? 

If  you  said  "load  the  X register  with  . . . ,"  go  to  the  top  of  the  class. 
If  you  didn't,  then  don't  worry,  learning  machine  language  does  take 
patience,  and  cannot  be  learned  in  a day. 

The  various  internal  registers  can  be  thought  of  as  special  memory 
locations,  because  they  too  can  hold  one  byte  of  information.  It  is  not 
necessary  for  us  to  explain  the  binary  numbering  system  (base  2)  since  it 
follows  the  same  rules  as  outlined  for  hexadecimal  and  decimal  outlined 
previously,  but  one  "bit"  is  one  binary  digit  and  eight  bits  make  up  one 
byte!  This  means  that  the  maximum  number  that  can  be  contained  in  a 
byte  is  the  largest  number  that  an  eight  digit  binary  number  can  be.  This 
number  is  11111111  (binary),  which  equals  $FF  (hexadecimal),  which 
equals  255  (decimal).  You  have  probably  wondered  why  only  numbers 
from  zero  to  255  could  be  put  into  a memory  location.  If  you  try  POKE 
7680,260  (which  is  a BASIC  statement  that  "says":  "Put  the  number  two 
hundred  and  sixty,  into  memory  location  seven  thousand,  six  hundred 
and  eighty,"  the  BASIC  interpreter  knows  that  only  numbers  0 — 255  can 
be  put  in  a memory  location,  and  your  Commodore  64  will  reply  with: 

?ILLEGAL  QUANTITY  ERROR 

READY. 


If  the  limit  of  one  byte  is  $FF  (hex),  how  is  the  address  parameter  in  the 
absolute  instruction  "LDA  $102E"  expressed  in  memory?  It's  expressed  in 
two  bytes  (it  won't  fit  into  one,  of  course).  The  lower  (rightmost)  two 
digits  of  the  hexadecimal  address  form  the  "low  byte"  of  the  address, 
and  the  upper  (leftmost)  two  digits  form  the  "high  byte." 

The  6510  requires  any  address  to  be  specified  with  its  low  byte  first, 
and  then  the  high  byte.  This  means  that  the  instruction  "LDA  $102E"  is 
represented  in  memory  by  the  three  consecutive  values: 

$AD,  $2E,  $10 

Now  all  you  need  to  know  is  one  more  instruction  and  then  you  can  write 
your  first  program.  That  instruction  is  BRK.  For  a full  explanation  of  this 
instruction,  refer  to  M.O.S.  6502  Programming  Manual.  But  right  now, 
you  can  think  of  it  as  the  END  instruction  in  machine  language. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


219 


If  we  write  a program  with  64MON  and  put  the  BRK  instruction  at  the 
end,  then  when  the  program  is  executed,  it  will  return  to  64MON  when  it 
is  finished.  This  might  not  happen  if  there  is  a mistake  in  your  program, 
or  the  BRK  instruction  is  never  reached  (just  like  an  END  statement  in 
BASIC  may  never  get  executed).  This  means  that  if  the  Commodore  64 
didn't  have  a STOP  key,  you  wouldn't  be  able  to  abort  your  BASIC  pro- 
grams! 


WRITING  YOUR  FIRST  PROGRAM 


If  you've  used  the  POKE  statement  in  BASIC  to  put  characters  onto  the 
screen,  you're  aware  that  the  character  codes  for  POKEing  are  different 
from  CBM  ASCII  character  values.  For  example,  if  you  enter: 


PRINT  ASC("A")  (and  press 


RETURN  H 


the  Commodore  64  will  respond  with: 
65 

READY. 


However,  to  put  an  "A"  onto  the  screen  by  POKEing,  the  code  is  1, 
enter: 


SHIFT 


CLR/HOME 


to  clear  the  screen 


POKE  1 024, 1 :POKE  55296,14  (and 
of  screen  memory) 


RETURN 


) (1024  is  the  start 


The  "P"  in  the  POKE  statement  should  now  be  an  "A." 

Now  let's  try  this  in  machine  language.  Type  the  following  in  64MON: 
(Your  cursor  should  be  flashing  alongside  a right  now.) 


•A  1400  LDA  #$01  (and  press 


RETURN  K 


220  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


The  Commodore  64  will  prompt  you  with: 


.A  1400  A9  01  LDA  #$01 
.A  1402  ■ 

Type: 

.A  1402  STA  $0400 

(The  STA  instruction  stores  the  contents  of  the  accumulator  in  a specified 
memory  location.) 

The  Commodore  64  will  prompt  you  with: 

.A  1405  ■ 

Now  type  in: 

.A  1405  LDA  #$0E 
.A  1407  STA  $D800 
.A  140A  BRK 

Clear  the  screen,  and  type: 

G 1400 

The  G should  turn  into  an  " A " if  you've  done  everything  correctly. 

You  have  now  written  your  first  machine  language  program.  Its  pur- 
pose is  to  store  one  character  ("A”)  at  the  first  location  in  the  screen 
memory.  Having  achieved  this,  we  must  now  explore  some  of  the  other 
instructions,  and  principles. 

ADDRESSING  MODES 

ZERO  PAGE 


As  shown  earlier,  absolute  addresses  are  expressed  in  terms  of  a high 
and  a low  order  byte.  The  high  order  byte  is  often  referred  to  as  the 
page  of  memory.  For  example,  the  address  $1637  is  in  page  $16  (22), 
and  $0277  is  in  page  $02  (2).  There  is,  however,  a special  mode  of 
addressing  known  as  zero  page  addressing  and  is,  as  the  name  implies, 
associated  with  the  addressing  of  memory  locations  in  page  zero.  These 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  221 


addresses,  therefore,  ALWAYS  have  a high  order  byte  of  zero.  The  zero 
page  mode  of  addressing  only  expects  one  byte  to  describe  the  ad- 
dress, rather  than  two  when  using  an  absolute  address.  The  zero  page 
addressing  mode  tells  the  microprocessor  to  assume  that  the  high  order 
address  is  zero.  Therefore  zero  page  addressing  can  reference  memory 
locations  whose  addresses  are  between  $0000  and  $00FF.  This  may  not 
seem  too  important  at  the  moment,  but  you'll  need  the  principles  of  zero 
page  addressing  soon. 


THE  STACK 


The  6510  microprocessor  has  what  is  known  as  a stock . This  is  used 
by  both  the  programmer  and  the  microprocessor  to  temporarily  re- 
member things,  and  to  remember,  for  example,  an  order  of  events.  The 
GOSUB  statement  in  BASIC,  which  allows  the  programmer  to  call  a sub- 
routine, must  remember  where  it  is  being  called  from,  so  that  when  the 
RETURN  statement  is  executed  in  the  subroutine,  the  BASIC  interpreter 
"knows"  where  to  go  back  to  continue  executing.  When  a GOSUB 
statement  is  encountered  in  a program  by  the  BASIC  interpreter,  the 
BASIC  interpreter  "pushes"  its  current  position  onto  the  stack  before 
going  to  do  the  subroutine,  and  when  a RETURN  is  executed,  the  in- 
terpreter "pulls"  off  the  stack  the  information  that  tells  it  where  it  was 
before  the  subroutine  call  was  made.  The  interpreter  uses  instructions 
like  PHA,  which  pushes  the  contents  of  the  accumulator  onto  the  stack, 
and  PLA  (the  reverse)  which  pulls  a value  off  the  stack  and  into  the 
accumulator.  The  status  register  can  also  be  pushed  and  pulled  with  the 
PHP  and  PLP,  respectively. 

The  stack  is  256  bytes  long,  and  is  located  in  page  one  of  memory.  It 
is  therefore  from  $0100  to  $01  FF.  It  is  organized  backwards  in  memory. 
In  other  words,  the  first  position  in  the  stack  is  at  $01  FF,  and  the  last  is 
at  $0100.  Another  register  in  the  6510  microprocessor  is  called  the  stock 
pointer,  and  it  always  points  to  the  next  available  location  in  the  stack. 
When  something  is  pushed  onto  the  stack,  it  is  placed  where  the  stack 
pointer  points  to,  and  the  stack  pointer  is  moved  down  to  the  next  posi- 
tion (decremented).  When  something  is  pulled  off  the  stack,  the  stack 
pointer  is  incremented,  and  the  byte  pointed  to  by  the  stack  pointer  is 
placed  into  the  specified  register. 


222 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


Up  to  this  point,  we  have  covered  immediate,  zero  page,  and  abso- 
lute mode  instructions.  We  have  also  covered,  but  have  not  really  talked 
about,  the  "implied"  mode.  The  implied  mode  means  that  information  is 
implied  by  an  instruction  itself.  In  other  words,  what  registers,  flags, 
and  memory  the  instruction  is  referring  to.  The  examples  we  have  seen 
are  PHA,  PLA,  PHP,  and  PLP,  which  refer  to  stack  processing  and  the 
accumulator  and  status  registers,  respectively. 


NOTE:  The  X register  will  be  referred  to  as  X from  now  on,  and  similarly  A (ac- 
cumulator), Y (Y  index  register),  S (stack  pointer),  and  P (processor  status). 


INDEXING 

Indexing  plays  an  extremely  important  part  in  the  running  of  the  6510 
microprocessor.  It  can  be  defined  as  "creating  an  actual  address  from  a 
base  address  plus  the  contents  of  either  the  X or  Y index  registers." 

For  example,  if  X contains  $05,  and  the  microprocessor  executes  an 
LDA  instruction  in  the  "absolute  X indexed  mode"  with  base  address 
(e.g.,  $9000),  then  the  actual  location  that  is  loaded  into  the  A register 
is  $9000  + $05  = $9005.  The  mnemonic  format  of  an  absolute  indexed 
instruction  is  the  same  as  an  absolute  instruction  except  a ",X"  or  ",Y" 
denoting  the  index  is  added  to  the  address. 

EXAMPLE: 

LDA  $9000, X 

There  are  absolute  indexed,  zero  page  indexed,  indirect  indexed, 
and  indexed  indirect  modes  of  addressing  available  on  the  6510 
microprocessor. 

INDIRECT  INDEXED 

This  only  allows  usage  of  the  Y register  as  the  index.  The  actual  ad- 
dress can  only  be  in  zero  page,  and  the  mode  of  instruction  is  called 
indirect  because  the  zero  page  address  specified  in  the  instruction  con- 
tains the  low  byte  of  the  actual  address,  and  the  next  byte  to  it  contains 
the  high  order  byte. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  223 


EXAMPLE: 


Let  us  suppose  that  location  $02  contains  $45,  and  location  $03  con- 
tains $1E.  If  the  instruction  to  load  the  accumulator  in  the  indirect  inde- 
xed mode  is  executed  and  the  specified  zero  page  address  is  $02,  then 
the  actual  address  will  be: 


Low  order  = contents  of  $02 
High  order  = contents  of  $03 
Y register  =$00 


Thus  the  actual  address  = $1E45  4-  Y = $1E45. 

The  title  of  this  mode  does  in  fact  imply  an  indirect  principle,  although 
this  may  be  difficult  to  grasp  at  first  sight.  Let's  look  at  it  another  way: 

"I  am  going  to  deliver  this  letter  to  the  post  office  at  address 
$02, MEMORY  ST.,  and  the  address  on  the  letter  is  $05  houses  past 
$1600,  MEMORY  street."  This  is  equivalent  to  the  code: 


LDA  #$00 
STA  $02 
LDA  #$16 
STA  $03 
LDY  #$05 
LDA  ($02), Y 


— load  low  order  actual  base  address 

— set  the  low  byte  of  the  indirect  address 

— load  high  order  indirect  address 

— set  the  high  byte  of  the  indirect  address 

— set  the  indirect  index  (Y) 

— load  indirectly  indexed  by  Y 


INDEXED  INDIRECT 


Indexed  indirect  only  allows  usage  of  the  X register  as  the  index.  This 
is  the  same  as  indirect  indexed,  except  it  is  the  zero  page  address  of  the 
pointer  that  is  indexed,  rather  than  the  actual  base  address.  Therefore, 
the  actual  base  address  IS  the  actual  address  because  the  index  has 
already  been  used  for  the  indirect.  Index  indirect  would  also  be  used  if 


224  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


a table  of  indirect  pointers  were  located  in  zero  page  memory,  and  the 
X register  could  then  specify  which  indirect  pointer  to  use. 

EXAMPLE: 

Let  us  suppose  that  location  $02  contains  $45,  and  location  $03  con- 
tains $10.  If  the  instruction  to  load  the  accumulator  in  the  indexed  indi- 
rect mode  is  executed  and  the  specified  zero  page  address  is  $02,  then 
the  actual  address  will  be: 

Low  order  = contents  of  ($02 +X) 

High  order  = contents  of  ($03+X) 

X register  = $00 


Thus  the  actual  pointer  is  in  = $02  + X = $02. 

Therefore,  the  actual  address  is  the  indirect  address  contained  in  $02 
which  is  again  $1045. 

The  title  of  this  mode  does  in  fact  imply  the  principle,  although  it  may 
be^  difficult  to  grasp  at  first  sight.  Look  at  it  this  way: 

"\  am  going  to  deliver  this  letter  to  the  fourth  post  office  at  address 
$02, MEMORY  ST.,  and  the  address  on  the  letter  will  then  be  delivered  to 
$1600,  MEMORY  street/'  This  is  equivalent  to  the  code: 


LDA  #$00 
STA  $06 
LDA  #$16 
STA  $07 
LDX  #$04 
LDA  ($02,X) 


— load  low  order  actual  base  address 

— set  the  low  byte  of  the  indirect  address 

— load  high  order  indirect  address 

— set  the  high  byte  of  the  indirect  address 

— set  the  indirect  index  (X) 

— load  indirectly  indexed  by  X 


N : of  the  two  indirect  methods  of  addressing,  the  first  (indirect  indexed)  is  far 
more  widely  used. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  225 


BRANCHES  AND  TESTING 


Another  very  important  principle  in  machine  language  is  the  ability  to 
test,  and  detect  certain  conditions,  in  a smiliar  fashion  to  the  "IF  . . . 
THEN,  IF  . . . GOTO"  structure  in  CBM  BASIC. 

The  various  flags  in  the  status  register  are  affected  by  different  in- 
structions in  different  ways.  For  example,  there  is  a flag  that  is  set  when 
an  instruction  has  caused  a zero  result,  and  is  reset  when  a result  is  not 
zero.  The  instruction: 

LDA  #$00 

will  cause  the  zero  result  flag  to  be  set,  because  the  instruction  has 
resulted  in  the  accumulator  containing  a zero. 

There  are  a set  of  instructions  that  will,  given  a particular  condition, 
branch  to  another  part  of  the  program.  An  example  of  a branch  instruc- 
tion is  BEQ,  which  means  Branch  if  result  EQual  to  zero.  The  branch 
instructions  branch  if  the  condition  is  true,  and  if  not,  the  program  con- 
tinues onto  the  next  instruction,  as  if  nothing  had  occurred.  The  branch 
instructions  branch  not  by  the  result  of  the  previous  instruction(s),  but  by 
internally  examining  the  status  register.  As  was  just  mentioned,  there  is 
a zero  result  flag  in  the  status  register.  The  BEQ  instruction  branches  if 
the  zero  result  flag  (known  as  Z)  is  set.  Every  branch  instruction  has  an 
opposite  branch  instruction.  The  BEQ  instruction  has  an  opposite  instruc- 
tion BNE,  which  means  Branch  on  result  Not  Equal  to  zero  (i.e.,  Z not 
set). 

The  index  registers  have  a number  of  associated  instructions  which 
modify  their  contents.  For  example,  the  INX  instruction  INcrements  the  X 
index  register.  If  the  X register  contained  $FF  before  it  was  incremented 
(the  maximum  number  the  X register  can  contain),  it  will  "wrap  around" 
back  to  zero.  If  you  wanted  a program  to  continue  to  do  something  until 
you  had  performed  the  increment  of  the  X index  that  pushed  it  around 
to  zero,  you  could  use  the  BNE  instruction  to  continue  "looping"  around, 
until  X became  zero. 

The  reverse  of  INX,  is  DEX,  which  is  DEcrement  the  X index  register.  If 
the  X index  register  is  zero,  DEX  wraps  around  to  $FF.  Similarly,  there 
are  INY  and  DEY  for  the  Y index  register. 


226 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


But  what  if  a program  didn't  want  to  wait  until  X or  Y had  reached  (or 
not  reached)  zero?  Well  there  are  comparison  instructions , CPX  and 
CPY,  which  allow  the  machine  language  programmer  to  test  the  index 
registers  with  specific  values,  or  even  the  contents  of  memory  locations. 
If  you  wanted  to  see  if  the  X register  contained  $40,  you  would  use  the 
instruction: 

CPX  #$40  — compare  X with  the  "value"  $40. 

BEQ  — branch  to  somewhere  else  in  the 

(some  other  program,  if  this  condition  is  "true." 

part  of  the 
program) 


The  compare,  and  branch  instructions  play  a major  part  in  any  machine 
language  program. 

The  operand  specified  in  a branch  instruction  when  using  64MON  is 
the  address  of  the  part  of  the  program  that  the  branch  goes  to  when  the 
proper  conditions  are  met.  However,  the  operand  is  only  an  offset , 
which  gets  you  from  where  the  program  currently  is  to  the  address  spec- 
ified. This  offset  is  just  one  byte,  and  therefore  the  range  that  a branch 
instruction  can  branch  to  is  limited.  It  can  branch  from  128  bytes  back- 
ward, to  127  bytes  forward. 


This  is  a total  range  of  255  bytes  which  is,  of  course,  the  maximum  range  of 
values  one  byte  can  contain. 


64MON  will  tell  you  if  you  "branch  out  of  range"  by  refusing  to  "as- 
semble" that  particular  instruction.  But  don't  worry  about  that  now  be- 
cause it's  unlikely  that  you  will  have  such  branches  for  quite  a while.  The 
branch  is  a "quick"  instruction  by  machine  language  standards  because 
of  the  "offset"  principle  as  opposed  to  an  absolute  address.  64MON 
allows  you  to  type  in  an  absolute  address,  and  it  calculates  the  correct 
offset.  This  is  just  one  of  the  "comforts"  of  using  an  assembler. 

M : It  is  NOT  possible  to  cover  every  single  branch  instruction.  For  further  informa- 
tion, refer  to  the  Bibliography  section  in  Appendix  F. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


227 


SUBROUTINES 


In  machine  language  (in  the  same  way  as  using  BASIC),  you  can  call 
subroutines.  The  instruction  to  call  a subroutine  is  JSR  (Jump  to  Sub- 
Routine),  followed  by  the  specified  absolute  address. 

Incorporated  in  the  operating  system,  there  is  a machine  language 
subroutine  that  will  PRINT  a character  to  the  screen.  The  CBM  ASCII 
code  of  the  character  should  be  in  the  accumulator  before  calling  the 
subroutine.  The  address  of  this  subroutine  is  $FFD2. 

Therefore,  to  print  "HI"  to  the  screen,  the  following  program  should 
be  entered: 


.A  1400  LDA  #$48 
.A  1402  JSR  $FFD2 
.A  1405  LDA  #$49 
• A 1407  JSR  $FFD2 
.A  140A  LDA  #$0D 
.A  140C  JSR  $FFD2 
.A  HOF  BRK 
.G  1400 


— load  the  CBM  ASCII  code  of  "H" 

— print  it 

— load  the  CBM  ASCII  code  of  "I" 

— print  that  too 

— print  a carriage  return  as  well 

— return  to  64MON 

— will  print  "HI"  and  return  to  64MON 


The  PRINT  a character  routine  we  have  just  used  is  part  of  the 
KERNAL  jump  table.  The  instruction  similar  to  GOTO  in  BASIC  is  JMP, 
which  means  JuMP  to  the  specified  absolute  address.  The  KERNAL  is  a 
long  list  of  "standardized"  subroutines  that  control  ALL  input  and  output 
of  the  Commodore  64.  Each  entry  in  the  KERNAL  JMPs  to  a subroutine  in 
the  operating  system.  This  jump  table"  is  found  between  memory  loca- 
tions $FF84  to  $FFF5  in  the  operating  system.  A full  explanation  of  the 
KERNAL  is  available  in  the  "KERNAL  Reference  Section"  of  this  manual. 
However,  certain  routines  are  used  here  to  show  how  easy  and  effective 
the  KERNAL  is. 

Lefs  now  use  the  new  principles  you've  just  learned  in  another  pro- 
gram. It  will  help  you  to  put  the  instructions  into  context: 


228  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


This  program  will  display  the  alphabet  using  a KERNAL  routine.  The 
only  new  instruction  introduced  here  is  TXA  Transfer  the  contents  of  the  X 


index  register , into  the  Accumulator. 

.A  1400  LDX  #$41 

— X = CBM  ASCII  of  "A" 

.A  1402  TXA 

— A = X 

•A  1403  JSR  $FFD2 

— print  character 

.A  1406  INX 

— bump  count 

.A  1407  CPX  #$5B 

— have  we  gone  past  "Z"  ? 

.A  1409  BNE  $1402 

— no,  go  back  and  do  more 

•A  140B  BRK 

— yes,  return  to  64MON 

To  see  the  Commodore  64  print  the  alphabet,  type  the  familiar  com- 
mand: 

.G  1400 

The  comments  that  are  beside  the  program,  explain  the  program  flow 
and  logic.  If  you  are  writing  a program,  write  it  on  paper  first,  and  then 
test  it  in  small  parts  if  possible. 


USEFUL  TIPS  FOR  THE  BEGINNER 


One  of  the  best  ways  to  learn  machine  language  is  to  look  at  other 
peoples'  machine  language  programs.  These  are  published  all  the  time 
in  magazines  and  newsletters.  Look  at  them  even  if  the  article  is  for  a 
different  computer,  which  also  uses  the  6510  (or  6502)  microprocessor. 
You  should  make  sure  that  you  thoroughly  understand  the  code  that  you 
look  at.  This  will  require  perseverence,  especially  when  you  see  a new 
technique  that  you  have  never  come  across  before.  This  can  be  infuriat- 
ing, but  if  patience  prevails,  you  will  be  the  victor. 

Having  looked  at  other  machine  language  programs,  you  MUST  write 
your  own.  These  may  be  utilities  for  your  BASIC  programs,  or  they  may 
be  an  all  machine  language  program. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


229 


You  should  also  use  the  utilities  that  are  available,  either  IN  your 
computer,  or  in  a program,  that  aid  you  in  writing,  editing,  or  tracking 
down  errors  in  a machine  language  program.  An  example  would  be  the 
KERNAL,  which  allows  you  to  check  the  keyboard,  print  text,  control 
peripheral  devices  like  disk  drives,  printers,  modems,  etc.,  manage 
memory  and  the  screen.  It  is  extremely  powerful  and  it  is  advised 
strongly  that  it  is  used  (refer  to  KERNAL  section,  Page  268). 

Advantages  of  writing  programs  in  machine  language: 

1 . Speed  Machine  language  is  hundreds,  and  in  some  cases 
thousands  of  times  faster  than  a high  level  language  such  as 
BASIC. 

2.  Tightness — A machine  language  program  can  be  made  totally 
"watertight,"  i.e.,  the  user  can  be  made  to  do  ONLY  what  the 
program  allows,  and  no  more.  With  a high  level  language,  you 
are  relying  on  the  user  not  "crashing"  the  BASIC  interpreter  by 
entering,  for  example,  a zero  which  later  causes  a: 

?DIVISION  BY  ZERO  ERROR  IN  LINE  830 

READY. 


In  essence,  the  computer  can  only  be  maximized  by  the  machine  lan- 
guage programmer. 


APPROACHING  A LARGE  TASK 

When  approaching  a large  task  in  machine  language,  a certain 
amount  of  subconscious  thought  has  usually  taken  place.  You  think 
about  how  certain  processes  are  carried  out  in  machine  language. 
When  the  task  is  started,  it  is  usually  a good  idea  to  write  it  out  on 
paper.  Use  block  diagrams  of  memory  usage,  functional  modules  of 
code  required,  and  a program  flow.  Let's  say  that  you  wanted  to  write  a 

roulette  game  in  machine  language.  You  could  outline  it  something  like 
this: 


230  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


® Display  title 

• Ask  if  player  requires  instructions 

• YES  — display  them  — Go  to  START 

• NO— Go  to  START 

• START  Initialize  everything 

® MAIN  display  roulette  table 

• Take  in  bets 
® Spin  wheel 

© Slow  wheel  to  stop 

• Check  bets  with  result 
© Inform  player 

® Player  any  money  left? 

© YES  — Go  to  MAIN 
® NO  — Inform  user!,  and  go  to  START 

This  is  the  main  outline.  As  each  module  is  approached,  you  can 
break  it  down  further.  If  you  look  at  a large  indigestable  problem  as 
something  that  can  be  broken  down  into  small  enough  pieces  to  be 
eaten,  then  you'll  be  able  to  approach  something  that  seems  impossible, 
and  have  it  all  fall  into  place. 

This  process  only  improves  with  practice,  so  KEEP  TRYING. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


231 


MCS6510  MICROPROCESSOR 

ADC 

AND 

ASL 

Add  Memory  to  Accumulator  with  Carry 
"AND"  Memory  with  Accumulator 

Shift  Left  One  Bit  (Memory  or  Accumulator) 

BCC 

BCS 

BEQ 

BIT 

BMI 

BNE 

BPL 

BRK 

BVC 

BVS 

Branch  on  Carry  Clear 

Branch  on  Carry  Set 

Branch  on  Result  Zero 

Test  Bits  in  Memory  with  Accumulator 

Branch  on  Result  Minus 

Branch  on  Result  not  Zero 

Branch  on  Result  Plus 

Force  Break 

Branch  on  Overflow  Clear 

Branch  on  Overflow  Set 

CLC 

CLD 

CLI 

CLV 

CMP 

CPX 

CPY 

Clear  Carry  Flag 

Clear  Decimal  Mode 

Clear  Interrupt  Disable  Bit 

Clear  Overflow  Flag 

Compare  Memory  and  Accumulator 

Compare  Memory  and  Index  X 

Compare  Memory  and  Index  Y 

DEC 

DEX 

DEY 

Decrement  Memory  by  One 

Decrement  Index  X by  One 

Decrement  Index  Y by  One 

EOR 

"Exclusive-Or"  Memory  with  Accumulator 

INC 

INX 

INY 

Increment  Memory  by  One 

Increment  Index  X by  One 

Increment  Index  Y by  One 

JMP 

Jump  to  New  Location 

232 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


INSTRUCTION  SET— ALPHABETIC  SEQUENCE 


JSR  Jump  to  New  Location  Saving  Return  Address 

LDA  Load  Accumulator  with  Memory 

LDX  Load  Index  X with  Memory 

LDY  Load  Index  Y with  Memory 

LSR  Shift  Right  One  Bit  (Memory  or  Accumulator) 

NOP  No  Operation 

ORA  "OR"  Memory  with  Accumulator 

PHA  Push  Accumulator  on  Stack 

PHP  Push  Processor  Status  on  Stack 

PLA  Pull  Accumulator  from  Stack 

PLP  Pull  Processor  Status  from  Stack 

ROL  Rotate  One  Bit  Left  (Memory  or  Accumulator) 

ROR  Rotate  One  Bit  Right  (Memory  or  Accumulator) 

RTI  Return  from  Interrupt 

RTS  Return  from  Subroutine 

SBC  Subtract  Memory  from  Accumulator  with  Borrow 

SEC  Set  Carry  Flag 

SED  Set  Decimal  Mode 

SEI  Set  Interrupt  Disable  Status 

STA  Store  Accumulator  in  Memory 

STX  Store  Index  X in  Memory 

STY  Store  Index  Y in  Memory 

TAX  Transfer  Accumulator  to  Index  X 
TAY  Transfer  Accumulator  to  Index  Y 
TSX  Transfer  Stack  Pointer  to  Index  X 
TXA  Transfer  Index  X to  Accumulator 
TXS  Transfer  Index  X to  Stack  Pointer 
TYA  Transfer  Index  Y to  Accumulator 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


233 


The  following  notation  applies  to  this  summary: 


A 

X,  Y 
M 
P 
S 
/ 

+ 

A 

¥ 


V 

PC 

PCH 

PCL 

OPER 


Accumulator 
Index  Registers 
Memory 

Processor  Status  Register 

Stack  Pointer 

Change 

No  Change 

Add 

Logical  AND 
Subtract 

Logical  Exclusive  Or 
Transfer  from  Stack 
Transfer  to  Stack 
Transfer  to 
Transfer  from 
Logical  OR 
Program  Counter 
Program  Counter  High 
Program  Counter  Low 
OPERAND 

IMMEDIATE  ADDRESSING  MODE 


Note:  At  the  top  of  each  table  is  located  in  parentheses  a 

reference  number  (Ref:  XX)  which  directs  the  user  to 
that  Section  in  the  MCS6500  Microcomputer  Family 
Programming  Manual  in  which  the  instruction  is  defined 
and  discussed. 


234 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


ADC 


Add  memory  to  accumulator  with  carry 


ADC 


Operation:  A+M+C+A,  C 

(Ref:  2.2.1) 


N 2-  C I D V 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Immediate 

ADC 

//  Oper 

69 

2 

2 

Zero  Page 

ADC 

Oper 

65 

2 

3 

Zero  Page,  X 

ADC 

Oper,  X 

75 

2 

4 

Absolute 

ADC 

Oper 

6D 

3 

4 

Absolute,  X 

ADC 

Oper,  X 

7D 

3 

4* 

Absolute,  Y 

ADC 

Oper,  Y 

79 

3 

4* 

(Indirect,  X) 

ADC 

(Oper,  X) 

61 

2 

6 

(Indirect),  Y 

ADC 

(Oper) , Y 

71 

2 

5* 

* Add  1 if  page  boundary  is  crossed. 


AND 


“AND”  memory  with  accumulator 
Logical  AND  to  the  accumulator 


AND 


(Ref:  2. 2. 4.1)  / / 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Immediate 

AND 

//  Oper 

29 

2 

2 

Zero  Page 

AND 

Oper 

25 

2 

3 

Zero  Page,  X 

AND 

Oper,  X 

35 

2 

4 

Absolute 

AND 

Oper 

2D 

3 

4 

Absolute,  X 

AND 

Oper,  X 

3D 

3 

4* 

Absolute,  Y 

AND 

Oper,  Y 

39 

3 

4* 

(Indirect,  X) 

AND 

(Oper,  X) 

21 

2 

6 

(Indirect) , Y 

AND 

(Oper) , Y 

31 

2 

5 

* Add  1 if  page  boundary  is  crossed. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  235 


ASL 


ASL  Shift  Left  One  Bit  (Memory  or  Accumulator) 


ASL 


Operation:  C 


7 

6 

5 

4 

3 

2 

1 

0 

N -a  C I D V 
/ / / 


(Ref:  10.2) 


Addressing 

Assembly  Language 

OP 

No. 

No. 

Mode 

Form 

CODE 

Bytes 

Cycles 

Accumulator 

ASL  A 

0A 

1 

2 

Zero  Page 

ASL  Oper 

06 

2 

5 

Zero  Page,  X 

ASL  Oper,  X 

16 

2 

6 

Absolute 

ASL  Oper 

0E 

3 

6 

Absolute,  X 

ASL  Oper,  X 

IE 

3 

7 

BCC 

BCC  Branch  on  Carry  Clear 

BCC 

Operation:  Branch 

on  C = 0 

N i 

C I D V 

(Ref:  4. 1.2. 3) 

Addressing 

Assembly  Language 

OP 

No. 

No. 

Mode 

Form 

CODE 

Bytes 

Cycles 

Relative 

BCC  Oper 

90 

2 

2* 

* Add  1 if  branch  occurs  to  same  page. 

* Add  2 if  branch  occurs  to  different  page. 


BCS 


BCS  Branch  on  carry  set 


BCS 


Operation:  Branch  on  C = 1 NZCIDV 


(Ref:  4. 1.2. 4) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No . 
Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Relative 

BCS  Oper 

B0 

2 

2* 

* Add  1 if  branch  occurs  to  same  page. 

* Add  2 if  branch  occurs  to  next  page. 


236 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


BEQ 


BEQ  Branch  on  result  zero 


BEQ 


Operation:  Branch  on  2=1  N2CIDV 

(Ref:  A. 1.2. 5)  


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Relative 

BEQ  Oper 

F0 

2 

2* 

* Add  1 if  branch  occurs  to  same  page. 

* Add  2 if  branch  occurs  to  next  page. 


BIT  BIT  Test  bits  in 

Operation:  A A M,  M_  -►  N,  M, 
/ 6 


memory  with  accumulator 
+ V 


BIT 


Bit  6 and  7 are  transferred  to  the  status  register.  N 2 C I D V 
If  the  result  of  A AM  is  zero  then  Z = 1,  otherwise  M( 


(Ref:  A. 2. 2.1) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Zero  Page 

BIT  Oper 

2A 

2 

3 

Absolute 

BIT  Oper 

2C 

3 

A 

BMI 


BMI  Branch  on  result  minus 


BMI 


Operation:  Branch  on  N = 1 N-2CIDV 


(Ref:  A. 1.2.1) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Relative 

BMI  Oper 

30 

2 

2* 

* Add  1 if  branch  occurs  to  same  page. 

* Add  2 if  branch  occurs  to  different  page. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  237 


BNE  BNE  Branch  on  result  not  zero 

Operation:  Branch  on  Z = 0 


BNE 


N £ C I D V 


(Ref:  4. 1.2. 6) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Relative 

BNE  Oper 

D0 

2 

2* 

* Add  1 if  branch  occurs  to  same  page. 

* Add  2 if  branch  occurs  to  different  page. 


BPL 

Operation : 


BPL  Branch  on  result  plus 
Branch  on  N = 0 


BPL 

N 2 C I D V 


(Ref:  4. 1.2. 2) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Relative 

BPL  Oper 

10 

2 

2* 

* Add  1 if  branch  occurs  to  same  page. 

* Add  2 if  branch  occurs  to  different  page. 


BRK 


BRK  Force  Break 


BRK 


Operation:  Forced  Interrupt  PC  + 2 + p + N-ZCIDV 


(Ref:  9.11) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

BRK 

00 

1 

7 

1.  A BRK  command  cannot  be  masked  by  setting  I. 


238 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


BVC 


BYC 

Operation : 


BVC  Branch  on  overflow  clear 
Branch  on  V = 0 


N -2  C I D V 


(Ref:  4. 1.2. 8) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Relative 

BVC  Oper 

50 

2 

2* 

* Add  1 if  branch  occurs  to  same  page. 

* Add  2 if  branch  occurs  to  different  page. 


BYS 


BVS  Branch  on  overflow  set 


BYS 


Operation:  Branch  on  V = 1 


N 2 C I D V 


(Ref:  4. 1.2. 7) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Relative 

BVS  Oper 

70 

2 

2* 

* Add  1 if  branch  occurs  to  same  page. 

* Add  2 if  branch  occurs  to  different  page. 


CLC 

Operation : 0 -*■  C 

CLC  Clear  carry  flag 

(Ref:  3.0.2) 

N 2 

C I D V 

0 

CLC 

Addressing 

Assembly  Language 

OP 

No. 

No. 

Mode 

Form 

CODE 

Bytes 

Cycles 

Implied 

CLC 

18 

1 

2 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  239 


CLD  Clear  decimal  mode 


CLD 


CLD 

Operation:  0 ■+  D NSCIDV 


(Ref:  3.3.2) 


Addressing 

Hode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

CLD 

D8 

1 

2 

CLI 


CLI  Clear  interrupt  disable  bit 


Operation:  0 I 


CLI 

N 2 C I D V 


(Ref:  3.2.2)  0 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

CLI 

58 

1 

2 

CIV 

Operation:  0 •+  V 


CLV  Clear  overflow  flag 


CLV 

N 2-  C I D V 


(Ref:  3.6.1) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

CLV 

B8 

1 

2 

240  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


CMP 


CMP  Compare  memory  and  accumulator 


CMP 


Operation:  A-M  NZCIDV 


(Ref:  4.2.1) 


Addressing 

Mode 

/ssembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Immediate 

CMP  #Oper 

C9 

2 

2 

Zero  Page 

CMP 

Oper 

C5 

2 

3 

Zero  Page,  X 

CMP 

Oper,  X 

D5 

2 

4 

Absolute 

CMP 

Oper 

CD 

3 

4 

Absolute,  X 

CMP 

Oper,  X 

DD 

3 

4* 

Absolute,  Y 

CMP 

Oper,  Y 

D9 

3 

4* 

(Indirect,  X) 

CMP 

(Oper,  X) 

Cl 

2 

6 

(Indirect),  Y 

CMP 

(Oper),  Y 

D1 

2 

5* 

* Add  1 if  page  boundary  is  crossed. 


CPX  CPX  Compare  Memory  and  Index  X CPX 

Operation:  X-M  NZCIDV 


(Ref:  7.8) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No, 

Cycles 

Immediate 

CPX  #Oper 

E0 

2 

2 

Zero  Page 

CPX  Oper 

E4 

2 

3 

Absolute 

CPX  Oper 

EC 

3 

4 

CPY  Compare  memory  and  index  Y 

Operation:  Y-M  NZCIDV 

✓ ✓ ✓ 

(Ref:  7.9) 

CPY 

Addressing 

Assembly  Language 

OP 

No. 

No. 

Mode 

Form 

CODE 

Bytes 

Cycles 

Immediate 

CPY  #Oper 

C0 

2 

2 

Zero  Page 

CPY  Oper 

C4 

2 

3 

Absolute 

CPY  Oper 

CC 

3 

4 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


241 


DEC 


DEC 

Operation:  M - 


DEC  Decrement  memory  by  one 
1 + M 


N Z C I D V 


/ / 

(Ref:  10.8) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Zero  Page 

DEC 

Oper 

C6 

2 

5 

Zero  Page,  X 

DEC 

Oper,  X 

D6 

2 

6 

Absolute 

DEC 

Oper 

CE 

3 

6 

Absolute,  X 

DEC 

Oper,  X 

DE 

3 

7 

DEX 

Operation : 


DEX  Decrement  index  X by  one 
X - 1 X 


DEX 

N 2 C I D V 


(Ref:  7.6)  // 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

DEX 

CA 

1 

2 

DEY 

Operation:  Y - 1 


DEY  Decrement  index  Y by  one 
-+  Y 


N Z C I D V 


DEY 


(Ref:  7.7) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

DEY 

88 

1 

2 

242  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


EOR  EOR  "Exclusive— Or”  memory  with  accumulator  EOR 

Operation:  A -V-  M -►  A NZCIDV 

/ / 

(Ref:  2. 2. 4. 3) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Immediate 

EOR 

#Oper 

49 

2 

2 

Zero  Page 

EOR 

Oper 

45 

2 

3 

Zero  Page,  X 

EOR 

Oper , X 

55 

2 

4 

Absolute 

EOR 

Oper 

4D 

3 

4 

Absolute,  X 

EOR 

Oper,  X 

5D 

3 

4* 

Absolute,  Y 

EOR 

Oper,  Y 

59 

3 

4* 

(Indirect,  X) 

EOR 

(Oper,  X) 

41 

2 

6 

(Indirect) ,Y 

EOR 

(Oper) , Y 

51 

2 

5* 

* Add  1 if  page  boundary  is  crossed. 


INC 


INC  Increment  memory  by  one 


Operation:  M + 1 -►  M 


INC 

NZCIDV 


/ / 

(Ref:  10.7) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

CP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Zero  Page 

INC 

Oper 

E6 

2 

5 

Zero  Page,  X 

INC 

Oper,  X 

F6 

2 

6 

Absolute 

INC 

Oper 

EE 

3 

6 

Absolute,  X 

INC 

Oper,  X 

FE 

3 

7 

INX  INX  Increment  Index  X by  one  INX 

Operation:  X+l+X  NZCIDV 


/ / 

(Ref:  7.4) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

INX 

E8 

1 

2 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


243 


INY 


INY 


INY  Increment  Index  Y by  one 


Operation:  Y + 1 -+  Y 


N Z C I D V 


(Ref:  7.5) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form  * 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

INY 

C8 

1 

2 

JMP 


JMP  Jump  to  new  location 


Operation:  (PC  + 1)  -+  PCL 

(PC  + 2)  -*  PCH  (Ref:  4-0.2) 
(Ref:  9.8.1) 


JMP 

N Z C I D V 


Addressing 

Assembly  Language 

OP 

No. 

No. 

Mode 

Form 

CODE 

Bytes 

Cycles 

Absolute 

JMP  Oper 

AC 

3 

3 

Indirect 

JMP  (Oper) 

6C 

3 

5 

JSR 


JSR  Jump  to  new  location  saving  return  address 


Operation:  PC  + 2 (PC  + 1)  -*  PCL 

(PC  + 2)  -*  PCH 

(Ref:  8.1) 


JSR 


N Z C I D V 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Absolute 

JSR  Oper 

20 

3 

6 

244  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


LDA  Load  accumulator  with  memory 


LDA 


LDA 

Operation:  M+A  N2CIDV 


(Ref:  2.1.1) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Immediate 

LDA 

# Oper 

A9 

2 

2 

Zero  Page 

LDA 

Oper 

A5 

2 

3 

Zero  Page,  X 

LDA 

Oper,  X 

B5 

2 

4 

Absolute 

LDA 

Oper 

AD 

3 

4 

Absolute,  X 

LDA 

Oper,  X 

BD 

3 

4* 

Absolute,  Y 

LDA 

Oper,  Y 

B9 

3 

4* 

(Indirect,  X) 

LDA 

(Oper,  X) 

A1 

2 

6 

(Indirect),  Y 

LDA 

(Oper) , Y 

B1 

2 

5* 

* Add  1 if  page  boundary  is  crossed. 


LDX  LDX  Load  index  X with  memory  LDX 

Operation:  M -►  X NZCIDV 


(Ref:  7.0) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Immediate 

LDX 

//  Oper 

A2 

2 

2 

Zero  Page 

LDX 

Oper 

A6 

2 

3 

Zero  Page,  Y 

LDX 

Oper,  Y 

B6 

2 

4 

Absolute 

LDX 

Oper 

AE 

3 

4 

Absolute,  Y 

LDX 

Oper,  Y 

BE 

3 

4* 

* Add  1 when  page  boundary  is  crossed. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


245 


LDY  Load  index  Y with  memory 


LDY 


LDY 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Immediate 

LDY  # Oper 

A0 

2 

2 

Zero  Page 

LDY 

Oper 

A4 

2 

3 

Zero  Page,  X 

LDY 

Oper,  X 

B4 

2 

4 

Absolute 

LDY 

Oper 

AC 

3 

4 

Absolute,  X 

LDY 

Oper,  X 

BC 

3 

4* 

* Add  1 when  page  boundary  is  crossed. 


LSR 


LSR  Shift  right  one  bit  ( memory  or  accumulator) 


LSR 


Operation:  0 76543210 


C 


(Ref:  10.1) 


N Z C I D V 

0 / / 


Addressing 

Assembly  Language 

OP 

No. 

No. 

Mode 

Form 

CODE 

Bytes 

Cycles 

Accumulator 

LSR  A 

4A 

1 

2 

Zero  Page 

LSR  Oper 

46 

2 

5 

Zero  Page,  X 

LSR  Oper,  X 

56 

2 

6 

Absol ute 

LSR  Oper 

4E 

3 

6 

Absolute,  X 

LSR  Oper,  X 

5E 

3 

7 

NOP 

NOP  No  operation 

NOP 

Operation:  No  Operation  (2  cycles) 

N Z 

C I D V 

Addressing 

Assembly  Language 

OP 

No. 

No. 

Mode 

Form 

CODE 

Bytes 

Cycles 

Implied 

NOP 

EA 

1 

2 

246 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


ORA 


ORA  “OR  ” memory  with  accumulator 


Operation:  A V M -+ 

A 

(Ref:  2. 2. 3.1) 

N Z 

/ ✓ 

C I D V 

Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Immediate 

ORA  #Oper 

09 

2 

2 

Zero  Page 

ORA  Oper 

05 

2 

3 

Zero  Page,  X 

ORA  Oper,  X 

15 

2 

4 

Absolute 

ORA  Oper 

0D 

3 

4 

Absolute,  X 

ORA  Oper,  X 

ID 

3 

4* 

Absolute,  Y 

ORA  Oper,  Y 

19 

3 

4* 

(Indirect,  X) 

ORA  (Oper,  X) 

01 

2 

6 

(Indirect),  Y 

ORA  (Oper) , Y 

11 

2 

5 

* Add  1 on  page  crossing 


PHA 


PHA  Push  accumulator  on  stack 


PHA 


Operation:  A i 


N Z C I D V 


(Ref:  8.5) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

PHA 

48 

1 

3 

PHP 

Operation:  PT 


PHP  Push  processor  status  on  stack 

N Z C I D V 


PHP 


(Ref:  8.11) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

PHP 

08 

1 

3 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


247 


PLA  Pull  accumulator  from  stack 


PLA 


PLA 

Operation:  At  NZCIDV 


(Ref:  8.6) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

PLA 

68 

1 

4 

PLP 

Operation:  P t 


PLP  Pull  processor  status  from  stack 


NZCIDV 


PLP 


(Ref:  8.12) 


From  Stack 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

PLP 

28 

1 

4 

ROL 


ROL  Rotate  one  bit  left  ( memory  or  accumulator) 


ROL 


Operation:  {_  | 7 ] 6 

M or  A 

1 5 1 A | 3 1 2 1 1 1 0 | - EJ 

(Ref:  10.3) 

NZCIDV 

/ / / 

Addressing 

Assembly  Language 

OP 

No. 

No. 

Mode 

Form 

CODE 

Bytes 

Cycles 

Accumulator 

ROL  A 

2A 

1 

2 

Zero  Page 

ROL  Oper 

26 

2 

5 

Zero  Page,  X 

ROL  Oper,  X 

36 

2 

6 

Absolute 

ROL  Oper 

2E 

3 

6 

Absolute,  X 

ROL  Oper,  X 

3E 

3 

7 

248 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


ROR 


ROR  Rotate  one  bit  right  (memory  or  accumulator) 


ROR 


Operation: 


— H 71615Ia131211M 

(Ref:  10.4) 


N 2 C I D V 
/ / / 


Addressing 

Assembly  Language 

OP 

No. 

No. 

Mode 

Form 

CODE 

Bytes 

Cycles 

Accumulator 

ROR  A 

6A 

1 

2 

Zero  Page 

ROR  Oper 

66 

2 

5 

Zero  Page,X 

ROR  Oper,X 

76 

2 

6 

Absolute 

ROR  Oper 

6E 

3 

6 

Absolute ,X 

ROR  Oper ,X 

7E 

3 

7 

Note:  ROR  instruction  is  available  on  MCS650X  micro- 
processors after  June,  1976. 


RTI 


RTI  Return  from  interrupt 


RTI 


Operation:  Pt  PCi 


N 2 C I D V 


(Ref:  9.6) 


From  Stack 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

RTI 

40 

1 

6 

RTS 


RTS  Return  from  subroutine 


Operation:  PCt,  PC  + l->  PC 


N 2 C I D V 


RTS 


(Ref:  8.2) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

RTS 

60 

1 

6 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  249 


SBC 


SBC 


SBC  Subtract  memory  from  accumulator  with  borrow 
Operation:  A-M-C+A  NZCIDV 

Note:  C = Borrow  (Ref:  2.2.2)  /// / 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Immediate 

SBC  #0per 

E9 

2 

2 

Zero  Page 

SBC 

Oper 

E5 

2 

3 

Zero  Page,  X 

SBC 

Oper,  X 

F5 

2 

4 

Absolute 

SBC 

Oper 

ED 

3 

4 

Absolute,  X 

SBC 

Oper,  X 

FD 

3 

4* 

Absolute,  Y 

SBC 

Oper,  Y 

F9 

3 

4* 

(Indirect,  X) 

SBC 

(Oper,  X) 

El 

2 

6 

(Indirect),  Y 

SBC 

(Oper) , Y 

FI 

2 

5* 

: Add  1 when  page  boundary  is  crossed. 


SEC 

Operation:  1 ■+  C 


SEC  Set  carry  flag 
(Ref:  3.0.1) 


NZCIDV 


SEC 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

SEC 

38 

1 

2 

SED  Set  decimal  mode 

Operation:  1+D  NZCIDV 

(Ref:  3.3.1)  1 ~~ 

SED 

Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

SED 

F8 

1 

2 

250 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


SEI  Set  interrupt  disable  status 


SEI 


SEI 


Operation:  1 I NZCIDV 

(Ref:  3.2.1) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

SEI 

78 

1 

2 

STA 

Operation : 


STA  Store  accumulator  in  memory 

A + M 


NZCIDV 


STA 


(Ref:  2.1.2) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Zero  Page 

STA 

Oper 

85 

2 

3 

Zero  Page,  X 

STA 

Oper,  X 

95 

2 

4 

Absolute 

STA 

Oper 

8D 

3 

4 

Absolute,  X 

STA 

Oper,  X 

9D 

3 

5 

Absolute,  Y 

STA 

Oper,  Y 

99 

3 

5 

(Indirect,  X) 

STA 

(Oper,  X) 

81 

2 

6 

(Indirect),  Y 

STA 

(Oper),  Y 

91 

2 

6 

STX 

Operation:  X -►  M 


STX  Store  index  X in  memory 

NZCIDV 


STX 


(Ref:  7.2) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Zero  Page 

STX 

Oper 

86 

2 

3 

Zero  Page,  Y 

STX 

Oper,  Y 

96 

2 

4 

Absolute 

STX 

Oper 

8E 

3 

4 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


251 


STY  Store  index  Y in  memory 


Operation:  Y-*M  NZCIDV 


(Ref:  7.3) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Zero  Page 

STY 

Oper 

84 

2 

3 

Zero  Page,  X 

STY 

Oper,  X 

94 

2 

4 

Absolute 

STY 

Oper 

8C 

3 

4 

TAX 

Operation : 


A + X 


TAX  Transfer  accumulator  to  index  X 

NZCIDV 


(Ref:  7.11) 


✓ / 


TAX 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

TAX 

AA 

1 

2 

TAY 


TAY  Transfer  accumulator  to  index  Y 


Operation:  A •*  Y 


NZCIDV 


TAY 


/ / 

(Ref:  7.13) 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

TAY 

A8 

1 

2 

252 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


TSX  Transfer  stack  pointer  to  index  X 


TSX 


TSX 


Operation:  S+X  NZCIDV 

(Ref:  8.9)  ^ 


Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

TSX 

BA 

1 

2 

1 Xi  1 TXA  Transfer  index  X to  accumulator 

Operation:  X -*•  A N Z 

(Ref:  7.12)  ^ ^ 

C I D V 

TXA 

Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

TXA 

8A 

1 

2 

TXS 

Operation:  X ■+  S 

Transfer  index  X to  stack  pointer 

NZCIDV 

(Ref:  8.8) 

Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

TXS 

9A 

1 

2 

TYA  Transfer  index  Y to  accumulator 
Operation:  Y A N Z 

/ / ■ 

(Ref:  7.14) 

C I D V 

TYA 

Addressing 

Mode 

Assembly  Language 
Form 

OP 

CODE 

No. 

Bytes 

No. 

Cycles 

Implied 

TYA 

98 

1 

2 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


253 


INSTRUCTION  ADDRESSING  MODES  AND 

% 

w 

X 

> 

"V 

© 

x > 5 

> £ 

jg 

“5 

E 

3 

O 

< 

Immediate 

Zero  Page 

Zero  Page 

i 

a. 

0 

• 

N 

Absolute 

Absolute, 

Absolute, 

Implied 

Relative 

(Indirect,  ! 

8 i 

I 3 

ADC 

2 

3 4 

4 4*  4*  . . 6 

5*  . 

AND 

2 

3 4 

4 4*  4*  . . 6 

5*  . 

ASL 

2 

5 6 

6 7... 

BCC 

. . . . 2**. 

BCS 

. . . . 2**. 

BEQ 

....  2**. 

BIT 

3 . 

4 

BMI 

....  2**. 

BNE 

. . . . 2**. 

BPL 

2** 

BRK 

BVC 

2** 

BVS 

2** 

CLC 

...  2 . . 

CLD 

. . . 2 . . 

CLI 

...  2 . . 

CLV 

...  2 . . 

CMP 

2 

3 4 

4 4‘  4*  . . 6 

5*  ' 

CPX 

2 

3 . 

4 

CPY 

2 

3 . 

4 

DEC 

. 

5 6 

6 7... 

DEX 

. 

...  2 . . 

DEY 

...  2 . . 

EOR 

2 

3 4 

4 4*  4*  . . 6 

5*  ! 

iNC 

5 6 

6 7... 

INX 

. 

. 

...  2 . . 

iNY 

...  2 . . 

JMP 

• 

• 

• 

3 

! 5 

• 

Add  one  cycle  if 

indexing  across  page  boundary 

• * 

Add  one  cycle  if 

branch  is  taken.  Add  one 

additional 

254 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


RELATED 

EXECUTION  TIMES  (in  clock  cycles) 

Accumulator 

Immediate 

Zero  Page 

Zero  Page,  X 

Zero  Page,  Y 

Absolute 

Absolute,  X 

Absolute,  Y 

Implied 

Relative 

(Indirect,  X) 

(lndirect),Y 

Absolute  Indirect 

JSR 

6 . . . 

LDA 

. 2 3 4.  4 4*  4*  . 

6 5*  ! 

LDX 

23.  44.  4*  . 

LDY 

234.  44*.  . 

LSR 

2 . 5 6.  6 7.  . 

NOP 

2 

ORA 

2 3 4.  4 4*  4*. 

6 5*  '. 

PHA 

3 

PHP 

3 

PLA 

4 

PLP 

4 

ROL 

2 . 5 6.  6 7.  . 

ROR 

2 . 5 6.  6 7.  . 

RT! 

6 

RTS 

6 

SBC 

2 3 4.  4 4*  4*  . 

6 5*  . 

SEC 

2 

SED 

2 

SEI 

2 

STA 

.3  4.4  5 5. 

6 6 ' 

STX 

. .3.44.  . . 

STY 

. .34.4.  . . 

TAX 

2 

TAY 

2 

TSX 

2 

TXA 

2 

TXS 

2 

TYA  2 

if  branching  operation  crosses  page  boundary 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


255 


00  - BRK 

01  - ORA  - (Indirect, X) 

02  - Future  Expansion 

03  - Future  Expansion 

04  - Future  Expansion 

05  - ORA  - Zero  Page 

06  - ASL  - Zero  Page 

07  - Future  Expansion 

08  - PHP 

09  - ORA  - Immediate 
0A  - ASL  - Accumulator 
0B  - Future  Expansion 
0C  - Future  Expansion 
0D  - ORA  - Absolute 

0E  - ASL  - Absolute 
0F  - Future  Expansion 

10  - BPL 

11  - ORA  - (Indirect), Y 

12  - Future  Expansion 

13  - Future  Expansion 

14  - Future  Expansion 

15  - ORA  - Zero  Page,X 

16  - ASL  - Zero  Page,X 

17  - Future  Expansion 

18  - CLC 

19  - ORA  - Absolute, Y 
1A  - Future  Expansion 
IB  - Future  Expansion 
1C  - Future  Expansion 
ID  - ORA  - Absolute,X 
IE  - ASL  - Absolute, X 
IF  - Future  Expansion 


20  - JSR 

21  - AND  - (Indirect, X) 

22  - Future  Expansion 

23  - Future  Expansion 

24  - BIT  - Zero  Page 

25  - AND  - Zero  Page 

26  - ROL  - Zero  Page 

27  - Future  Expansion 

28  - PLP 

29  - AND  - Immediate 
2A  - ROL  - Accumulator 
2B  - Future  Expansion 
2C  - BIT  - Absolute 

2D  - AND  - Absolute 
2E  - ROL  - Absolute 
2F  - Future  Expansion 

30  - BM1 

31  - AND  - (Indirect), Y 

32  - Future  Expansion 

33  - Future  Expansion 

34  - Future  Expansion 

35  - AND  - Zero  Page,X 

36  - ROL  - Zero  Page,X 

37  - Future  Expansion 

38  - SEC 

39  - AND  - Absolute, Y 
3A  - Future  Expansion 
3B  - Future  Expansion 
3C  - Future  Expansion 
3D  - AND  - Absolute, X 
3E  - ROL  - Absolute, X 
3F  - Future  Expansion 


256 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


40 

- 

RTI 

60 

- 

RTS 

41 

- 

EOR  - (Indirect ,X) 

61 

- 

ADC  - (Indirect, X) 

42 

- 

Future  Expansion 

62 

- 

Future  Expansion 

43 

- 

Future  Expansion 

63 

- 

Future  Expansion 

44 

- 

Future  Expansion 

64 

- 

Future  Expansion 

45 

- 

EOR  - Zero  Page 

65 

- 

ADC  - Zero  Page 

46 

- 

LSR  - Zero  Page 

66 

- 

ROR  - Zero  Page 

47 

- 

Future  Expansion 

67 

- 

Future  Expansion 

48 

- 

PHA 

68 

- 

PLA 

49 

- 

EOR  - Immediate 

69 

- 

ADC  - Immediate 

4A 

- 

LSR  - Accumulator 

6A 

- 

ROR  - Accumulator 

4B 

- 

Future  Expansion 

6B 

- 

Future  Expansion 

4C 

- 

JMP  - Absolute 

6C 

- 

JMP  - Indirect 

4D 

- 

EOR  - Absolute 

6D 

- 

ADC  - Absolute 

4E 

- 

LSR  - Absolute 

6E 

- 

ROR  - Absolute 

4F 

- 

Future  Expansion 

6F 

- 

Future  Expansion 

50 

- 

BVC 

70 

- 

BVS 

51 

- 

EOR  - (Indirect) ,Y 

71 

- 

ADC  - (Indirect) ,Y 

52 

- 

Future  Expansion 

72 

- 

Future  Expansion 

53 

- 

Future  Expansion 

73 

- 

Future  Expansion 

54 

- 

Future  Expansion 

74 

- 

Future  Expansion 

55 

- 

EOR  - Zero  Page,X 

75 

- 

ADC  - Zero  Page,X 

56 

- 

LSR  - Zero  Page,X 

76 

- 

ROR  - Zero  Page,X 

57 

- 

Future  Expansion 

77 

- 

Future  Expansion 

58 

- 

CLI 

78 

- 

SEI 

59 

- 

EOR  - Absolute, Y 

79 

- 

ADC  - Absolute, Y 

5A 

- 

Future  Expansion 

7A 

- 

Future  Expansion 

5B 

- 

Future  Expansion 

7B 

- 

Future  Expansion 

5C 

- 

Future  Expansion 

7C 

- 

Future  Expansion 

5D 

- 

EOR  - Absolute, X 

7D 

- 

ADC  - Absolute, X 

5E 

- 

LSR  - Absolute , X 

7E 

- 

ROR  - Absolute, X 

5F 

- 

Future  Expansion 

7F 

- 

Future  Expansion 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  257 


80  - Future  Expansion 

81  - STA  - (Indirect, X) 

82  - Future  Expansion 

83  - Future  Expansion 

84  - STY  - Zero  Page 

85  - STA  - Zero  Page 

86  - STX  - Zero  Page 

87  - Future  Expansion 

88  - DEY 

89  - Future  Expansion 
8A  - TXA 

8B  - Future  Expansion 
8C  - STY  - Absolute 
8D  - STA  — Absolute 
8E  - STX  - Absolute 
8F  - Future  Expansion 

90  - BCC 

91  - STA  - (Indirect), Y 

92  - Future  Expansion 

93  - Future  Expansion 

94  - STY  - Zero  Page,X 

95  - STA  - Zero  Page,X 

96  - STX  - Zero  Page,Y 

97  - Future  Expansion 

98  - TYA 

99  - STA  - Absolute, Y 
9A  - TXS 

9B  - Future  Expansion 
9C  - Future  Expansion 
9D  - STA  - Absolute, X 
9E  - Future  Expansion 
9F  - Future  Expansion 


A0  - LDY  - Immediate 
A1  - LDA  - (Indirect, X) 
A2  - LDX  - Immediate 
A3  - Future  Expansion 
A4  - LDY  - Zero  Page 
A5  - LDA  - Zero  Page 
A6  - LDX  - Zero  Page 
A7  - Future  Expansion 
A8  - TAY 

A9  - LDA  - Immediate 
AA  - TAX 

AB  - Future  Expansion 
AC  - LDY  - Absolute 
AD  — LDA  — Absolute 
AE  - LDX  - Absolute 
AF  - Future  Expansion 
B0  - BCS 

B1  - LDA  - (Indirect)  ,Y’ 
B2  - Future  Expansion 
B3  - Future  Expansion 
B4  - LDY  - Zero  Page,X 
B5  - LDA  - Zero  Page,X 
B6  - LDX  - Zero  Page,Y 
B7  - Future  Expansion 
B8  - CLV 

B9  - LDA  - Absolute, Y 
BA  - TSX 

BB  - Future  Expansion 
BC  - LDY  - Absolute, X 
BD  - LDA  - Absolute, X 
BE  - LDX  - Absolute, Y 
BF  - Future  Expansion 


258  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


c 0 

- 

CPY  - Immediate 

E0 

- 

CPX  - Immediate 

Cl 

- 

CMP  - (Indirect ,X) 

El 

- 

SBC  - (Indirect, X) 

C2 

- 

Future  Expansion 

E2 

- 

Future  Expansion 

C3 

- 

Future  Expansion 

E3 

- 

Future  Expansion 

C4 

- 

CPY  - Zero  Page 

E4 

- 

CPX  - Zero  Page 

C5 

- 

CMP  - Zero  Page 

E5 

- 

SBC  - Zero  Page 

C6 

- 

DEC  - Zero  Page 

E6 

- 

INC  - Zero  Page 

C7 

- 

Future  Expansion 

E7 

- 

Future  Expansion 

C8 

- 

INY 

E8 

- 

INX 

C9 

- 

CMP  - Immediate 

E9' 

- 

SBC  - Immediate 

CA 

- 

DEX 

EA 

- 

NOP 

CB 

- 

Future  Expansion 

EB 

- 

Future  Expansion 

CC 

- 

CPY  - Absolute 

EC 

- 

CPX  - Absolute 

CD 

- 

CMP  - Absolute 

ED 

- 

SBC  - Absolute 

CE 

- 

DEC  - Absolute 

EE 

- 

INC  - Absolute 

CF 

- 

Future  Expansion 

EF 

- 

Future  Expansion 

D0 

- 

BNE 

F0 

- 

BEQ 

D1 

- 

CMP  - (Indirect)-, Y 

FI 

- 

SBC  - (Indirect) ,Y 

D2 

- 

Future  Expansion 

F2 

- 

Future  Expansion 

D3 

- 

Future  Expansion 

F3 

- 

Future  Expansion 

D4 

- 

Future  Expansion 

F4 

- 

Future  Expansion 

D5 

- 

CMP  - Zero  Page,X 

F5 

- 

SBC  - Zero  Page,X 

D6 

- 

DEC  - Zero  Page,X 

F6 

- 

INC  - Zero  Page,X 

D7 

- 

Future  Expansion 

F7 

- 

Future  Expansion 

D8 

- 

CLD 

F8 

- 

SED 

D9 

- 

CMP  - Absolute, Y 

F9 

- 

SBC  - Absolute, Y 

DA 

- 

Future  Expansion 

FA 

- 

Future  Expansion 

DB 

- 

Future  Expansion 

FB 

- 

Future  Expansion 

DC 

- 

Future  Expansion 

FC 

- 

Future  Expansion 

DD 

- 

CMP  - Absolute, X 

FD 

- 

SBC  - Absolute, X 

DE 

- 

DEC  - Absolute, X 

FE 

- 

INC  - Absolute, X 

DF 

- 

Future  Expansion 

FF 

- 

Future  Expansion 

BASIC  TO 

MACHINE  LANGUAGE  259 

MEMORY  MANAGEMENT  ON  THE 
COMMODORE  64 


The  Commodore  64  has  64K  bytes  of  RAM.  It  also  has  20K  bytes  of 
ROM,  containing  BASIC,  the  operating  system,  and  the  standard  char- 
acter set.  It  also  accesses  input/output  devices  as  a 4K  chunk  of  mem- 
ory. How  is  this  all  possible  on  a computer  with  a 16-bit  address  bus, 
that  is  normally  only  capable  of  addressing  64K? 

The  secret  is  in  the  6510  processor  chip  itself.  On  the  chip  is  an  input/ 
output  port.  This  port  is  used  to  control  whether  RAM  or  ROM  or  I/O  will 
appear  in  certain  portions  of  the  system's  memory.  The  port  is  also  used 
to  control  the  Datassette™,  so  it  is  important  to  affect  only  the  proper 
bits. 

The  6510  input/output  port  appears  at  location  1.  The  data  direction 
register  for  this  port  appears  at  location  0.  The  port  is  controlled  like  any 
of  the  other  input/output  ports  in  the  system  . . . the  data  direction 
controls  whether  a given  bit  will  be  an  input  or  an  output,  and  the  actual 
data  transfer  occurs  through  the  port  itself. 

The  lines  in  the  6510  control  port  are  defined  as  follows: 


NAME 

BIT 

DIRECTION 

DESCRIPTION 

LORAM 

HIRAM 

0 

OUTPUT 

Control  for  RAM/ROM  at 
$A000— $BFFF  (BASIC) 

1 

OUTPUT 

Control  for  RAM/ROM  at 
$E000— $FFFF  (KERNAL) 

CHAREN 

2 

OUTPUT 

Control  for  l/O/ROM  at 
$D000— $DFFF 

3 

OUTPUT 

Cassette  write  line 

4 

INPUT 

Cassette  switch  sense 

5 

OUTPUT 

Cassette  motor  control 

The  proper  value  for  the  data  direction  register  is  as  follows: 

BITS  5 4 3 2 10 

10  1111 


(where  1 is  an  output,  and  0 is  an  input). 


260  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


This  gives  a value  of  47  decimal.  The  Commodore  64  automatically 
sets  the  data  direction  register  to  this  value. 

The  control  lines,  in  general,  perform  the  function  given  in  their  de- 
scriptions. However,  a combination  of  control  lines  are  occasionally  used 
to  get  a particular  memory  configuration. 

(bit  0)  can  generally  be  thought  of  as  a control  line  which 
banks  the  8K  byte  BASIC  ROM  in  and  out  of  the  microprocessor  address 
space.  Normally,  this  line  is  HIGH  for  BASIC  operation.  If  this  line  is 
programmed  LOW,  the  BASIC  ROM  will  disappear  from  the  memory 
map  and  be  replaced  by  8K  bytes  of  RAM  from  $A000-$BFFF. 

HIRAM  (bit  1)  can  generally  be  thought  of  as  a control  line  which 
banks  the  8K  byte  KERNAL  ROM  in  and  out  of  the  microprocessor  ad- 
dress space.  Normally,  this  line  is  HIGH  for  BASIC  operation.  If  this  line 
is  programmed  LOW,  the  KERNAL  ROM  will  disappear  from  the  memory 
map  and  be  replaced  by  8K  bytes  of  RAM  from  $E000-$FFFF. 


NOTE:  for  more  details  on  LORAM  and  HIRAM  see  the  memory  maps  on  pages 
262-267. 


CHAREN  (bit  2)  is  used  only  to  bank  the  4K  byte  character  generator 
ROM  in  or  out  of  the  microprocessor  address  space.  From  the  processor 
point  of  view,  the  character  ROM  occupies  the  same  address  space  as 
the  I/O  devices  ($D000— $DFFF).  When  the  CHAREN  line  is  set  to  1 (as  is 
normal),  the  I/O  devices  appear  in  the  microprocessor  address  ^pace, 
and  the  character  ROM  is  not  accessable.  When  the  CHAREN  bit  is 
cleared  to  0,  the  character  ROM  appears  in  the  processor  address 
space,  and  the  I/O  devices  are  not  accessable.  (The  microprocessor  only 
needs  to  access  the  character  ROM  when  downloading  the  character  set 
from  ROM  to  RAM.  Special  care  is  needed  for  this  . . . see  the  section 
on  PROGRAMMABLE  CHARACTERS  in  the  GRAPHICS  chapter).  CHAREN 
can  be  overridden  by  other  control  lines  in  certain  memory 
configurations.  CHAREN  will  have  no  effect  on  any  memory 
configuration  without  I/O  devices.  RAM  will  appear  from  $D000— $DFFF 
instead. 


In  any  memory  map  containing  ROM,  a WRITE  (a  POKE)  to  a ROM  location  will 
store  data  in  the  RAM  "under"  the  ROM.  \Miting  to  a ROM  location  stores  data  in  the 
"hidden"  RAM.  For  example,  this  allows  a hi-resolution  screen  to  be  kept  underneath 
a ROM,  and  be  changed  without  having  to  bank  the  screen  back  into  the  processor 
address  space.  Of  course  a READ  of  a ROM  location  will  return  the  contents  of  the 
ROM,  not  the  "hidden"  RAM. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


261 


COMMODORE  64  FUNDAMENTAL  MEMORY  MAP 


E000-FFFF 


D000-DFFF 

C000-CFFF 


A000-BFFF 


8000-9FFF 


4000-7FFF 


0000-3FFF 


I/O  BREAKDOWN 


D000-D3FF  VIC  (Video  Controller)  IK  Bytes 

D400-D7FF  SID  (Sound  Synthesizer)  IK  Bytes 

D800-DBFF  Color  RAM  IK  Nybbles 

DCOO-DCFF  CIA1  (Keyboard)  256  Bytes 

DDOO-DDFF  CIA2  (Serial  Bus,  User  Port/RS-232)  256  Bytes 

DEOO-DEFF  Open  I/O  slot  #1  (CP/M  Enable)  256  Bytes 

DFOO-DFFF  Open  I/O  slot  #2  (Disk)  256  Bytes 


8K  KERNAL  ROM 
OR 
RAM 


4K  I/O  OR  RAM  OR 
CHARACTER  ROM 


4K  RAM 


8K  BASIC  ROM 
OR 
RAM 
OR 

ROM  PLUG-IN 


8K  RAM 
OR 

ROM  PLUG-IN 


16K  RAM 


16K  RAM 


262 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


The  two  open  I/O  slots  are  for  general  purpose  user  I/O,  special  pur- 
pose I/O  cartridges  (such  as  IEEE),  and  have  been  tentatively  designated 
for  enabling  the  Z-80  cartridge  (CP/M  option)  and  for  interfacing  to  a 
low-cost  high-speed  disk  system. 

The  system  provides  for  "auto-start"  of  the  program  in  a Commodore 
64  Expansion  Cartridge.  The  cartridge  program  is  started  if  the  first  nine 
bytes  of  the  cartridge  ROM  starting  at  location  32768  ($8000)  contain 
specific  data.  The  first  two  bytes  must  hold  the  Cold  Start  vector  to  be 
used  by  the  cartridge  program.  The  next  two  bytes  at  32770  ($8002) 
must  be  the  Warm  Start  vector  used  by  the  cartridge  program.  The  next 
three  bytes  must  be  the  letters,  CBM,  with  bit  7 set  in  each  letter.  The 
last  two  bytes  must  be  the  digits  "80"  in  PET  ASCII. 


COMMODORE  64  MEMORY  MAPS 

The  following  tables  list  the  various  memory  configurations  available 
on  the  COMMODORE  64,  the  states  of  the  control  lines  which  select  each 
memory  map,  and  the  intended  use  of  each  map. 


X = DON’T  CARE 

0 = LOW 

1 = HIGH 

LORAM  = 1 
HIRAM  = 1 
GAME  = 1 
EXROM  = 1 


This  is  the  default  BASIC  memory 
map  which  provides  BASIC  2.0  and 
38K  contiguous  bytes  of  user  RAM. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


263 


X = DON’T  CARE 

0 = LOW 

1 = HIGH 


E000 

D000 

COOO 


8000 


4000 


0000 


8K  RAM 


4K  I/O 


4K  RAM 


16K  RAM 


16K  RAM 


16K  RAM 


LORAM  = 1 
HIRAM  = 0 
GAME  = 1 
EXROM  = X 
OR 

LORAM  = 1 
HIRAM  = 0 
GAME  = 0 
(THE  CHARACTER  ROM 
IS  NOT  ACCESSIBLE  BY 
THE  CPU  IN  THIS  MAP) 
EXROM  = 0 


This  map  provides  60K  bytes  of 
RAM  and  I/O  devices.  The  user 
must  write  his  own  I/O  driver 
routines. 


E000 

D000 

COOO 


8000 


4000 


0000 


X = DON’T  CARE 

0 = LOW 

1 = HIGH 


LORAM  = 0 
HIRAM  = 1 
GAME  = 1 
EXROM  = X 


^™t,(?ad  lan9uages (including 
CP/M),  providing  52K  contiguous 
bytes  of  user  RAM,  I/O  devices 
and  I/O  driver  routines. 


264  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


X = DON’T  CARE 

0 = LOW 

1 = HIGH 


C000 


8000 


4000 


0000 


E000 

D000 

C000 

A000 

8000 


4000 


0000 


8K  KERNAL  ROM 


4K  I/O 


4K  RAM  (BUFFER) 


8K  BASIC  ROM 


8K  ROM  CARTRIDGE 
(BASIC  EXP) 


16K  RAM 


16K  RAM 


LORAM  = 0 
HIRAM  = 0 
GAME  = 1 
EXROM  = X 

LORAM  = 0 
HIRAM  = 0 
GAME  = X 
EXROM  = 0 


This  map  gives  access  to  all  64K 
bytes  of  RAM.  The  I/O  devices 
must  be  banked  back  into  the 
processor’s  address  space  for  any 
I/O  operation. 


X = DON’T  CARE 

0 = LOW 

1 = HIGH 


LORAM  1 
HIRAM  1 
GAME  1 
EXROM  0 


This  is  the  standard  configuration 
for  a BASIC  system  with  a BASIC 
expansion  ROM.  This  map  provides 
32K  contiguous  bytes  of  user  RAM 
and  up  to  8K  bytes  of  BASIC 
“enhancement.” 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  265 


266 


EOOO 

DOOO 

COOO 

AOOO 

8000 


4000 


0000 


EOOO 

DOOO 

COOO 


8000 


4000 


0000 


8K  KERNAL  ROM 

4K  I/O 

4K  RAM  (BUFFER) 

8K  ROM  (CARTRIDGE) 

8K  RAM 

16K  RAM 

16K  RAM 

8K KERNAL ROM 

4K  I/O 

4K  RAM  (BUFFER) 

16K  ROM  (CARTRIDGE) 

16K  RAM 

16K  RAM 

X = DON’T  CARE 

0 = LOW 

1 = HIGH 


LORAM  = 0 
HIRAM  = 1 
GAME  = 0 
EXROM  = 0 


This  map  provides  40K  contiguous 
bytes  of  user  RAM  and  up  to  8K 
bytes  of  plug-in  ROM  for  special 
ROM-based  applications  which  don’t 
require  BASIC. 


X = DON’T  CARE 

0 = LOW 

1 = HIGH 


LORAM  = 1 
HIRAM  = 1 
GAME  = 0 
EXROM  = 0 


This  map  provides  32K  contiguous 
bytes  of  user  RAM  and  up  to  16K 
bytes  of  plug-in  ROM  for  special 
ROM-based  applications  which  don't 
require  BASIC  (word  processors, 
other  languages,  etc.). 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


EOOO 

DOOO 

COOO 

AOOO 

8000 


4000 


1000 

0000 


8K  CARTRIDGE  ROM 


4K  I/O 

4K  OPEN 


8K  OPEN 


8K  CARTRIDGE  ROM 


16K  OPEN 


12K  OPEN 


4K  RAM 


X = DON’T  CARE 

0 = LOW 

1 = HIGH 


LORAM  = X 
HIRAM  = X 
GAME  = 0 
EXROM  = 1 


This  is  the  ULTIMAX  video  game 
memory  map.  Note  that  the  2K 
byte  “expansion  RAM’’  for  the 
ULTIMAX,  if  required,  is  accessed 
out  of  the  COMMODORE  64  and  any 
RAM  in  the  cartridge  is  ignored. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  267 


THE  KERNAL 


One  of  the  problems  facing  programmers  in  the  microcomputer  field 
is  the  question  of  what  to  do  when  changes  are  made  to  the  operating 
system  of  the  computer  by  the  company.  Machine  language  programs 
which  took  much  time  to  develop  might  no  longer  work,  forcing  major 
revisions  in  the  program.  To  alleviate  this  problem.  Commodore  has 
developed  a method  of  protecting  software  writers  called  the  KERNAL. 

Essentially,  the  KERNAL  is  a standardized  JUMP  TABLE  to  the  input, 
output,  and  memory  management  routines  in  the  operating  system.  The 
locations  of  each  routine  in  ROM  may  change  as  the  system  is  up- 
graded. But  the  KERNAL  jump  table  will  always  be  changed  to  match.  If 
your  machine  language  routines  only  use  the  system  ROM  routines 
through  the  KERNAL,  it  will  take  much  less  work  to  modify  them,  should 
that  need  ever  arise. 

The  KERNAL  is  the  operating  system  of  the  Commodore  64  computer. 
All  input,  output,  and  memory  management  is  controlled  by  the 
KERNAL. 

To  simplify  the  machine  language  programs  you  write,  and  to  make 
sure  that  future  versions  of  the  Commodore  64  operating  system  don't 
make  your  machine  language  programs  obsolete,  the  KERNAL  contains 
a jump  table  for  you  to  use.  By  taking  advantage  of  the  39  input/output 
routines  and  other  utilities  available  to  you  from  the  table,  not  only  do 
you  save  time,  you  also  make  it  easier  to  translate  your  programs  from 
one  Commodore  computer  to  another. 

The  jump  table  is  located  on  the  last  page  of  memory,  in  read-only 
memory  (ROM). 

To  use  the  KERNAL  jump  table,  first  you  set  up  the  parameters  that  the 
KERNAL  routine  needs  to  work.  Then  JSR  (Jump  to  SubRoutine)  to  the 
proper  place  in  the  KERNAL  jump  table.  After  performing  its  function, 
the  KERNAL  transfers  control  back  to  your  machine  language  program. 
Depending  on  which  KERNAL  routine  you  are  using,  certain  registers 
may  pass  parameters  back  to  your  program.  The  particular  registers  for 
each  KERNAL  routine  may  be  found  in  the  individual  descriptions  of  the 
KERNAL  subroutines. 


268  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


A good  question  at  this  point  is  why  use  the  jump  table  at  all?  Why 
not  just  JSR  directly  to  the  KERNAL  subroutine  involved?  The  jump  table 
is  used  so  that  if  the  KERNAL  or  BASIC  is  changed,  your  machine  lan- 
guage programs  will  still  work.  In  future  operating  systems  the  routines 
may  have  their  memory  locations  moved  around  to  a different  position 
in  the  memory  map  . . . but  the  jump  table  will  still  work  correctly! 


KERNAL  POWER-UP  ACTIVITIES 

1)  On  power-up,  the  KERNAL  first  resets  the  stack  pointer,  and  clears 
decimal  mode. 

2)  The  KERNAL  then  checks  for  the  presence  of  an  autostart  ROM  car- 
tridge at  location  $8000  HEX  (32768  decimal).  If  this  is  present,  nor- 
mal initialization  is  suspended,  and  control  is  transferred  to  the  car- 
tridge code.  If  an  autostart  ROM  is  not  present,  normal  system  ini- 
tialization continues. 

3)  Next,  the  KERNAL  initializes  all  INPUT/OUTPUT  devices.  The  serial  bus 
is  initialized.  Both  6526  CIA  chips  are  set  to  the  proper  values  for 
keyboard  scanning,  and  the  60-Hz  timer  is  activated.  The  SID  chip  is 
cleared.  The  BASIC  memory  map  is  selected  and  the  cassette  motor 
is  switched  off.  (See  page  263  for  more  information.) 

4)  Next,  the  KERNAL  performs  a RAM  test,  setting  the  top  and  bottom  of 
memory  pointers.  Also,  page  zero  is  initialized,  and  the  tape  buffer 
is  set  up. 

The  RAM  TEST  routine  is  a nondestructive  test  starting  at  location 
$0300  and  working  upward.  Once  the  test  has  found  the  first  non- 
RAM  location,  the  top  of  RAM  has  its  pointer  set.  The  bottom  of 
memory  is  always  set  to  $0800,  and  the  screen  setup  is  always  set  at 
$0400. 

5)  Finally,  the  KERNAL  performs  these  other  activities.  I/O  vectors  are 
set  to  default  values.  The  indirect  jump  table  in  low  memory  is  estab- 
lished. The  screen  is  then  cleared,  and  all  screen  editor  variables 
reset.  Then  the  indirect  at  $A000  is  used  to  start  BASIC. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


269 


HOW  TO  USE  THE  KERNAL 


When  writing  machine  language  programs  it  is  often  convenient  to 
use  the  routines  which  are  already  part  of  the  operating  system  for 
input/output,  access  to  the  system  clock,  memory  management,  and 
other  similar  operations.  It  is  an  unnecessary  duplication  of  effort  to 
write  these  routines  over  and  over  again,  so  easy  access  to  the  operat- 
ing system  helps  speed  machine  language  programming. 

As  mentioned  before,  the  KERNAL  is  a jump  table.  This  is  just  a col- 
lection of  JMP  instructions  to  many  operating  system  routines. 

To  use  a KERNAL  routine  you  must  first  make  all  of  the  preparations  that 
the  routine  demands.  If  one  routine  says  that  you  must  call  another 
KERNAL  routine  first,  then  that  routine  must  be  called.  If  the  routine 
expects  you  to  put  a number  in  the  accumulator,  then  that  number  must 
be  there.  Otherwise  your  routines  have  little  chance  of  working  the  way 
you  expect  them  to  work. 

After  all  preparations  are  made,  you  must  call  the  routine  by  means 
of  the  JSR  instruction.  All  KERNAL  routines  you  can  access  are  structured 
as  SUBROUTINES,  and  must  end  with  an  RTS  instruction.  When  the 
KERNAL  routine  has  finished  its  task,  control  is  returned  to  your  program 
at  the  instruction  after  the  JSR. 

Many  of  the  KERNAL  routines  return  error  codes  in  the  status  word  or 
the  accumulator  if  you  have  problems  in  the  routine.  Good  programming 
practice  and  the  success  of  your  machine  language  programs  demand 
that  you  handle  this  properly.  If  you  ignore  an  error  return,  the  rest  of 
your  program  might  "bomb" 

That's  all  there  is  to  do  when  you're  using  the  KERNAL.  Just  these 
three  simple  steps: 

1)  Set  up 

2)  Call  the  routine 

3)  Error  handling 


270  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


The  following  conventions  are  used  in  describing  the  KERNAL  routines: 


— FUNCTION  NAME:  Name  of  the  KERNAL  routine. 

— CALL  ADDRESS:  This  is  the  call  address  of  the  KERNAL  routine,  given 
in  hexadecimal. 

— COMMUNICATION  REGISTERS:  Registers  listed  under  this  heading 
are  used  to  pass  parameters  to  and  from  the  KERNAL  routines. 

— PREPARATORY  ROUTINES:  Certain  KERNAL  routines  require  that  data 
be  set  up  before  they  can  operate.  The  routines  needed  are  listed 
here. 

— ERROR  RETURNS:  A return  from  a KERNAL  routine  with  the  CARRY  set 
indicates  that  an  error  was  encountered  in  processing.  The  ac- 
cumulator will  contain  the  number  of  the  error. 

— STACK  REQUIREMENTS:  This  is  the  actual  number  of  stack  bytes  used 
by  the  KERNAL  routine. 

— REGISTERS  AFFECTED:  All  registers  used  by  the  KERNAL  routine  are 
listed  here. 

— DESCRIPTION:  A short  tutorial  on  the  function  of  the  KERNAL  routine 

is  given  here. 


The  list  of  the  KERNAL  routines  follows. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


271 


USER  CALLABLE  KERNAL  ROUTINES 


NAME 

ADDRESS 

FUNCTION 

HEX 

DECIMAL 

ACPTR 

$FFA5 

65445 

Input  byte  from  serial 
port. 

CHKIN 

$FFC6 

65478 

Open  channel  for  input 

CHKOUT 

$FFC9 

65481 

Open  channel  for  output 

CHRIN 

$FFCF 

65487 

Input  character  from 
channel 

CHROUT 

$FFD2 

65490 

Output  character  to  chan- 
nel 

CIOUT 

$FFA8 

65448 

Output  byte  to  serial  port 

CINT 

$FF81 

65409 

Initialize  screen  editor 

CLALL 

$FFE7 

65511 

Close  all  channels  and 
files 

CLOSE 

$FFC3 

65475 

Close  a specified  logical 
file 

CLRCHN 

$FFCC 

65484 

Close  input  and  output 
channels 

GETIN 

$FFE4 

65508 

Get  character  from 
keyboard  queue 
(keyboard  buffer) 

IOBASE 

$FFF3 

65523 

Returns  base  address  of 

I/O  devices 

IOINIT 

$FF84 

65412 

Initialize  input/output 

LISTEN 

$FFB1 

65457 

Command  devices  on  the 
serial  bus  to  LISTEN 

LOAD 

$FFD5 

65493 

Load  RAM  from  a device 

MEMBOT 

$FF9C 

65436 

Read/set  the  bottom  of 
memory 

MEMTOP 

$FF99 

65433 

Read/set  the  top  of  mem- 
ory 

OPEN 

$FFCO 

65472 

Open  a logical  file 

272 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


NAME 

ADDRESS 

FUNCTION 

HEX 

DECIMAL 

PLOT 

$FFF0 

65520 

Read/set  X,Y  cursor  posi- 
tion 

RAMTAS 

$FF87 

65415 

Initialize  RAM,  allocate 
tape  buffer,  set  screen 
$0400 

RDTIM 

$FFDE 

65502 

Read  real  time  clock 

READST 

$FFB7 

65463 

Read  I/O  status  word 

RESTOR 

$FF8A 

65418 

Restore  default  I/O  vectors 

SAVE 

$FFD8 

65496 

Save  RAM  to  device 

SCNKEY 

$FF9F 

65439 

Scan  keyboard 

SCREEN 

$FFED 

65517 

Return  X,Y  organization 
of  screen 

SECOND 

$FF93 

65427 

Send  secondary  address 
after  LISTEN 

SETLFS 

$FFBA 

65466 

Set  logical,  first,  and  sec- 
ond addresses 

SETMSG 

$FF90 

65424 

Control  KERNAL  messages 

SETNAM 

$FFBD 

65469 

Set  file  name 

SETTIM 

$FFDB 

65499 

Set  real  time  clock 

SETTMO 

$FFA2 

65442 

Set  timeout  on  serial  bus 

STOP 

$FFE1 

65505 

Scan  stop  key 

TALK 

$FFB4 

65460 

Command  serial  bus  de- 
vice to  TALK 

TKSA 

$FF96 

65430 

Send  secondary  address 
after  TALK 

UDTIM 

$FFEA 

65514 

Increment  real  time  clock 

UNLSN 

$FFAE 

65454 

Command  serial  bus  to 
UNLISTEN 

UNTLK 

$FFAB 

65451 

Command  serial  bus  to 
UNTALK 

VECTOR 

$FF8D 

65421 

Read/set  vectored  I/O 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  273 


B-l.  Function  Name:  ACPTR 


Purpose:  Get  data  from  the  serial  bus 
Call  address-  $FFA5  (hex)  65445  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A 
Preparatory  routines:  TALK,  TKSA 
Error  returns:  See  READST 
Stack  requirements:  13 
Registers  affected:  .A,  .X 


Description:  This  is  the  routine  to  use  when  you  want  to  get  informa- 
tion from  a device  on  the  serial  bus,  like  a disk.  This  routine  gets  a byte 
of  data  off  the  serial  bus  using  full  handshaking.  The  data  is  returned  in 
the  accumulator.  To  prepare  for  this  routine  the  TALK  routine  must  be 
called  first  to  command  the  device  on  the  serial  bus  to  send  data 
through  the  bus.  If  the  input  device  needs  a secondary  command,  it 
must  be  sent  by  using  the  TKSA  KERNAL  routine  before  calling  this 
routine.  Errors  are  returned  in  the  status  word.  The  READST  routine  is 
used  to  read  the  status  word. 


How  to  Use: 

0)  Command  a device  on  the  serial  bus  to  prepare  to  send  data  to 
the  Commodore  64.  (Use  the  TALK  and  TKSA  KERNAL  routines.) 

1)  Call  this  routine  (using  JSR). 

2)  Store  or  otherwise  use  the  data. 


EXAMPLE: 

;GET  A BYTE  FROM  THE  BUS 
JSR  ACPTR 
STA  DATA 


274  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


B-2.  Function  Name:  CHKIN 


Purpose  Open  a channel  for  input 
Call  address:  $FFC6  (hex)  65478  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .X 
Preparatory  routines:  (OPEN) 

Error  returns:  3,5,6 
Stack  requirements:  None 
Registers  affected:  .A,  .X 

Description:  Any  logical  file  that  has  already  been  opened  by  the 
KERNAL  OPEN  routine  can  be  defined  as  an  input  channel  by  this 
routine.  Naturally,  the  device  on  the  channel  must  be  an  input  device. 
Otherwise  an  error  will  occur,  and  the  routine  will  abort. 

If  you  are  getting  data  from  anywhere  other  than  the  keyboard,  this 
routine  must  be  called  before  using  either  the  CHRIN  or  the  GETIN  KER- 
NAL routines  for  data  input.  If  you  want  to  use  the  input  from  the 
keyboard,  and  no  other  input  channels  are  opened,  then  the  calls  to  this 
routine,  and  to  the  OPEN  routine  are  not  needed. 

When  this  routine  is  used  with  a device  on  the  serial  bus,  it  auto- 
matically sends  the  talk  address  (and  the  secondary  address  if  one  was 
specified  by  the  OPEN  routine)  over  the  bus. 

How  to  Use: 

0)  OPEN  the  logical  file  (if  necessary;  see  description  above). 

1)  Load  the  .X  register  with  number  of  the  logical  file  to  be  used. 

2)  Call  this  routine  (using  a JSR  command). 


Possible  errors  are: 

#3:  File  not  open 
#5:  Device  not  present 
#6:  File  not  an  input  file 

EXAMPLE: 

; PREPARE  FOR  INPUT  FROM  LOGICAL  FILE  2 
LDX  #2 
JSR  CHKIN 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


275 


B-3.  Function  Name:  CHKOUT 


Purpose:  Open  a channel  for  output 
Call  address:  $FFC9  (hex)  65481  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .X 
Preparatory  routines:  (OPEN) 

Error  returns:  0,3,5,/  (See  READST) 

Stack  requirements:  44- 
Registers  affected:  .A,  .X 

Description:  Any  logical  file  number  that  has  been  created  by  the 
KERNAL  routine  OPEN  can  be  defined  as  an  output  channel.  Of  course, 
the  device  you  intend  opening  a channel  to  must  be  an  output  device. 
Otherwise  an  error  will  occur,  and  the  routine  will  be  aborted. 

This  routine  must  be  called  before  any  data  is  sent  to  any  output 
device  unless  you  want  to  use  the  Commodore  64  screen  as  your  output 
device.  If  screen  output  is  desired,  and  there  are  no  other  output  chan- 
nels already  defined,  then  calls  to  this  routine,  and  to  the  OPEN  routine 
are  not  needed. 

When  used  to  open  a channel  to  a device  on  the  serial  bus,  this 
routine  will  automatically  send  the  LISTEN  address  specified  by  the  OPEN 
routine  (and  a secondary  address  if  there  was  one). 

How  to  Use: 

REMEMBER:  this  routine  is  NOT  NEEDED  to  send  data  to  the  screen. 


0)  Use  the  KERNAL  OPEN  routine  to  specify  a logical  file  number,  a 
LISTEN  address,  and  a secondary  address  (if  needed). 

1)  Load  the  .X  register  with  the  logical  file  number  used  in  the  open 
statement. 

2)  Call  this  routine  (by  using  the  JSR  instruction). 

EXAMPLE: 

LDX  #3  /DEFINE  LOGICAL  FILE  3 AS  AN  OUTPUT  CHANNEL 

JSR  CHKOUT 


Possible  errors  are: 

#3:  File  not  open 
#5:  Device  not  present 
#7:  Not  an  output  file 


276  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


B-4.  Function  Name:  CHRIN 


Purpose:  Get  a character  from  the  input  channel 
Call  address  $FFCF  (hex)  65487  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  -A 
Preparatory  routines-  (OPEN,  CHKIN) 

Error  returns  0 (See  READST) 

Stack  requirements:  7 + 

Registers  affected:  -A,  .X 


Description:  This  routine  gets  a byte  of  data  from  a channel  already 
set  up  as  the  input  channel  by  the  KERNAL  routine  CHKIN.  If  the  CHKIN 
has  NOT  been  used  to  define  another  input  channel,  then  all  your  data 
is  expected  from  the  keyboard.  The  data  byte  is  returned  in  the  ac- 
cumulator. The  channel  remains  open  after  the  call. 

Input  from  the  keyboard  is  handled  in  a special  way.  First,  the  cursor 
is  turned  on,  and  blinks  until  a carriage  return  is  typed  on  the  keyboard. 
All  characters  on  the  logical  screen  line  (up  to  80  characters)  can  be 
retrieved  one  at  a time  by  calling  this  routine.  When  the  carriage  return 
is  retrieved,  the  entire  line  has  been  processed.  The  next  time  this 
routine  is  called,  the  whole  process  begins  again,  i.e.,  by  flashing  the 
cursor. 


How  to  Use: 

FROM  THE  KEYBOARD 

1)  Retrieve  a byte  of  data  by  calling  this  routine. 

2)  Store  the  data  byte. 

3)  Check  if  it  is  the  last  data  byte  (is  it  a CR  ?). 

4)  If  not,  go  to  step  1 . 


EXAMPLE: 


LDY  $#00 
RD  JSR  CHRIN 
STA  DATA,Y 

INY 

CMP  #CR 
BNE  RD 


/PREPARE  THE  .Y  REGISTER  TO  STORE  THE  DATA 

/STORE  THE  YTH  DATA  BYTE  IN  THE  YTH 
/LOCATION  IN  THE  DATA  AREA. 

/IS  IT  A CARRIAGE  RETURN? 

/NO,  GET  ANOTHER  DATA  BYTE 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  277 


EXAMPLE: 


JSR  CHRIN 
STA  DATA 

FROM  OTHER  DEVICES 

0)  Use  the  KERNAL  OPEN  and  CHKIN  routines. 

1)  Call  this  routine  (using  a JSR  instruction). 

2)  Store  the  data. 

EXAMPLE: 

JSR  CHRIN 
STA  DATA 

B-5.  Function  Name:  CHROUT 

Purpose:  Output  a character 

Call  address:  $FFD2  (hex)  65490  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A 
Preparatory  routines:  (CHKOUT,OPEN) 

Error  returns:  0 (See  READST) 

Stack  requirements:  84- 
Registers  affected:  .A 

Description:  This  routine  outputs  a character  to  an  already  opened 
channel.  Use  the  KERNAL  OPEN  and  CHKOUT  routines  to  set  up  the 
output  channel  before  calling  this  routine.  If  this  call  is  omitted,  data  is 
sent  to  the  default  output  device  (number  3,  the  screen).  The  data  byte 
to  be  output  is  loaded  into  the  accumulator,  and  this  routine  is  called. 
The  data  is  then  sent  to  the  specified  output  device.  The  channel  is  left 
open  after  the  call. 


: Care  must  be  taken  when  using  this  routine  to  send  data  to  a specific  serial 
device  since  data  will  be  sent  to  all  open  output  channels  on  the  bus.  Unless  this  is 
desired,  all  open  output  channels  on  the  serial  bus  other  than  the  intended  destination 
channel  must  be  closed  by  a call  to  the  KERNAL  CLRCHN  routine. 


278  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


How  to  Use: 


0)  Use  the  CHKOUT  KERNAL  routine  if  needed  (see  description 
above). 

1)  Load  the  data  to  be  output  into  the  accumulator. 

2)  Call  this  routine. 

EXAMPLE: 

;DU PLICATE  THE  BASIC  INSTRUCTION 
LDX  #4 
JSR  CHKOUT 
LDA  #'A 
JSR  CHROUT 

B-6.  Function  Name:  CIOUT 

Purpose  Transmit  a byte  over  the  serial  bus 
Call  address:  $FFA8  (hex)  65448  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A 
Preparatory  routines:  LISTEN,  [SECOND] 

Error  returns:  See  READST 
Stack  requirements:  5 
Registers  affected:  None 

Description:  This  routine  is  used  to  send  information  to  devices  on  the 
serial  bus.  A call  to  this  routine  will  put  a data  byte  onto  the  serial  bus 
using  full  serial  handshaking.  Before  this  routine  is  called,  the  LISTEN 
KERNAL  routine  must  be  used  to  command  a device  on  the  serial  bus  to 
get  ready  to  receive  data.  (If  a device  needs  a secondary  address,  it 
must  also  be  sent  by  using  the  SECOND  KERNAL  routine.)  The  ac- 
cumulator is  loaded  with  a byte  to  handshake  as  data  on  the  serial  bus. 
A device  must  be  listening  or  the  status  word  will  return  a timeout.  This 
routine  always  buffers  one  character.  (The  routine  holds  the  previous 
character  to  be  sent  back.)  So  when  a call  to  the  KERNAL  UNLSN  routine 
is  made  to  end  the  data  transmission,  the  buffered  character  is  sent 
with  an  End  Or  Identify  (EOI)  set.  Then  the  UNLSN  command  is  sent  to 
the  device. 


CMD  4///A//; 

; LOG  I CAL  FILE  #4 
;OPEN  CHANNEL  OUT 

;SEND  CHARACTER 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  279 


How  to  Use: 

0)  Use  the  LISTEN  KERNAL  routine  (and  the  SECOND  routine  if 
needed). 

1)  Load  the  accumulator  with  a byte  of  data. 

2)  Call  this  routine  to  send  the  data  byte. 

EXAMPLE: 


LDA  #'X  ;SEND  AN  X TO  THE  SERIAL  BUS 

JSR  CIOUT 

B-7.  Function  Name:  CINT 

Purpose:  Initialize  screen  editor  & 6567  video  chip 
Call  address:  $FF81  (hex)  65409  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  None 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  None 
Stack  requirements  4 
Registers  affected:  .A,  .X,  .Y 

Description:  This  routine  sets  up  the  6567  video  controller  chip  in  the 
Commodore  64  for  normal  operation.  The  KERNAL  screen  editor  is  also 
initialized.  This  routine  should  be  called  by  a Commodore  64  program 
cartridge. 

How  to  Use: 

1)  Call  this  routine. 

EXAMPLE: 

JSR  CINT 

JMP  RUN  ;BEGIN  EXECUTION 


280  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


B-8.  Function  Name:  CLALL 


Purpose:  Close  all  flies 

Call  address:  $FFE7  (hex)  65511  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  None 
Preparatory  routines.  None 
Error  returns:  None 
Stack  requirements:  11 
Registers  affected:  .A,  .X 

Description  This  routine  closes  all  open  files.  When  this  routine  is 
called,  the  pointers  into  the  open  file  table  are  reset,  closing  all  files. 
Also,  the  CLRCHN  routine  is  automatically  called  to  reset  the  I/O  chan- 
nels. 

How  to  Use: 

1)  Call  this  routine. 

EXAMPLE: 

JSR  CLALL  ;CLOSE  ALL  FILES  AND  SELECT  DEFAULT  I/O  CHANNELS 
JMP  RUN  ;BEGIN  EXECUTION 

B-9.  Function  Name:  CLOSE 

Purpose  Close  a logical  file 

Call  address:  $FFC3  (hex)  65475  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  0,240  (See  READST) 

Stack  requirements:  24- 
Registers  affected:  .A,  .X,  .Y 

Description:  This  routine  is  used  to  close  a logical  file  after  all  I/O 
operations  have  been  completed  on  that  file.  This  routine  is  called  after 
the  accumulator  is  loaded  with  the  logical  file  number  to  be  closed  (the 
same  number  used  when  the  file  was  opened  using  the  OPEN  routine). 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  281 


How  to  Use: 


1)  Load  the  accumulator  with  the  number  of  the  logical  file  to  be 
closed. 

2)  Call  this  routine. 

EXAMPLE: 

;CLOSE  15 
LDA  #15 
JSR  CLOSE 

B-10.  Function  Name:  CLRCHN 

Purpose:  Clear  I/O  channels 

Call  address:  $FFCC  (hex)  65484  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  None 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns.-:  None 
Stack  requirements:  9 
Registers  affected:  .A,  .X 

Description:  This  routine  is  called  to  clear  all  open  channels  and  re- 
store the  I/O  channels  to  their  original  default  values.  It  is  usually  called 
after  opening  other  I/O  channels  (like  a tape  or  disk  drive)  and  using 
them  for  input/output  operations.  The  default  input  device  is  0 
(keyboard).  The  default  output  device  is  3 (the  Commodore  64  screen). 

If  one  of  the  channels  to  be  closed  is  to  the  serial  port,  an  UNTALK 
signal  is  sent  first  to  clear  the  input  channel  or  an  UNLISTEN  is  sent  to 
clear  the  output  channel.  By  not  calling  this  routine  (and  leaving  lis- 
teners) active  on  the  serial  bus)  several  devices  can  receive  the  same 
data  from  the  Commodore  64  at  the  same  time.  One  way  to  take  ad- 
vantage of  this  would  be  to  command  the  printer  to  TALK  and  the  disk  to 
LISTEN.  This  would  allow  direct  printing  of  a disk  file. 

This  routine  is  automatically  called  when  the  KERNAL  CLALL  routine  is 
executed. 

How  to  Use: 

1)  Call  this  routine  using  the  JSR  instruction. 

EXAMPLE: 

JSR  CLRCHN 


282  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


B-11.  Function  Name:  GETIN 


Purpose:  Get  a character 

Call  address:  $FFE4  (hex)  65508  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A 
Preparatory  routines:  CHKIN,  OPEN 
Error  returns  See  READST 
Stack  requirements:  74- 
Registers  affected:  .A  (.X,  .Y) 


Description:  If  the  channel  is  the  keyboard,  this  subroutine  removes 
one  character  from  the  keyboard  queue  and  returns  it  as  an  ASCII  value 
in  the  accumulator.  If  the  queue  is  empty,  the  value  returned  in  the 
accumulator  will  be  zero.  Characters  are  put  into  the  queue  auto- 
matically by  an  interrupt  driven  keyboard  scan  routine  which  calls  the 
SCNKEY  routine.  The  keyboard  buffer  can  hold  up  to  ten  characters. 
After  the  buffer  is  filled,  additional  characters  are  ignored  until  at  least 
one  character  has  been  removed  from  the  queue.  If  the  channel  is  RS- 
232,  then  only  the  .A  register  is  used  and  a single  character  is  returned. 
See  READST  to  check  validity.  If  the  channel  is  serial,  cassette,  or 
screen,  call  CHRIN  routine. 


How  to  Use: 

1)  Call  this  routine  using  a JSR  instruction. 

2)  Check  for  a zero  in  the  accumulator  (empty  buffer). 

3)  Process  the  data. 


EXAMPLE: 

;WAIT  FOR  A CHARACTER 
WAIT  JSR  GETIN 
CMP  #0 
BEQ  WAIT 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


283 


B-12.  Function  Name:  IOBASE 

Purpose:  Define  I/O  memory  page 
Call  address:  $FFF3  (hex)  65523  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .X,  .Y 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  None 
Stack  requirements:  2 
Registers  affected:  .X,  .Y 


Description:  This  routine  sets  the  X and  Y registers  to  the  address  of 
the  memory  section  where  the  memory  mapped  I/O  devices  are  located. 
This  address  can  then  be  used  with  an  offset  to  access  the  memory 
mapped  I/O  devices  in  the  Commodore  64.  The  offset  is  the  number  of 
locations  from  the  beginning  of  the  page  on  which  the  I/O  register  you 
want  is  located.  The  .X  register  contains  the  low  order  address  byte, 
while  the  .Y  register  contains  the  high  order  address  byte. 

This  routine  exists  to  provide  compatibility  between  the  Commodore 
64,  VIC-20,  and  future  models  of  the  Commodore  64.  If  the  I/O  locations 
for  a machine  language  program  are  set  by  a call  to  this  routine,  they 
should  still  remain  compatible  with  future  versions  of  the  Commodore 
64,  the  KERNAL  and  BASIC. 


How  to  Use: 

1)  Call  this  routine  by  using  the  JSR  instruction. 

2)  Store  the  .X  and  the  .Y  registers  in  consecutive  locations. 

3)  Load  the  .Y  register  with  the  offset. 

4)  Access  that  I/O  location. 


EXAMPLE: 

; SET  THE  DATA  DIRECTION  REGISTER  OF  THE  USER  PORT  TO  0 (INPUT) 
JSR  IOBASE 

STX  POINT  ;SET  BASE  REGISTERS 
STY  POINT  + 1 
LDY  #2 

LDA  #0  ;OFFSET  FOR  DDR  OF  THE  USER  PORT 
STA  (POINT),  Y ;SET  DDR  TO  0 


284  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


B-13.  Function  Name:  IOINIT 

Purpose:  Initialize  I/O  devices 

Call  Address:  $FF84  (hex)  65412  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  None 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  None 
Stack  requirements:  None 
Registers  affected:  .A,  .X,  .Y 

Description:  This  routine  initializes  all  input/output  devices  and 
routines.  It  is  normally  called  as  part  of  the  initialization  procedure  of  a 
Commodore  64  program  cartridge. 

EXAMPLE: 

JSR  IOINIT 


B-14.  Function  Name:  LISTEN 

Purpose:  Command  a device  on  the  serial  bus  to  listen 
Call  Address:  $FFB1  (hex)  65457  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  See  READST 
Stack  requirements:  None 
Registers  affected:  .A 

Description:  This  routine  will  command  a device  on  the  serial  bus  to 
receive  data.  The  accumulator  must  be  loaded  with  a device  number 
between  0 and  31  before  calling  the  routine.  LISTEN  will  OR  the  number 
bit  by  bit  to  convert  to  a listen  address,  then  transmits  this  data  as  a 
command  on  the  serial  bus.  The  specified  device  will  then  go  into  listen 
mode,  and  be  ready  to  accept  information. 

How  to  Use: 

1)  Load  the  accumulator  with  the  number  of  the  device  to  command 
to  LISTEN. 

2)  Call  this  routine  using  the  JSR  instruction. 

EXAMPLE: 

;COMMAND  DEVICE  #8  TO  LISTEN 
LDA  #8 
JSR  LISTEN 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  285 


B-15.  Function  Name:  LOAD 


Purpose:  Load  RAM  from  device 

Call  address:  $FFD5  (hex)  65493  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  ,A,.X,.Y 
Preparatory  routines:  SETLFS,  SETNAM 
Error  returns:  0,4, 5, 8,9,  READST 
Stack  requirements:  None 
Registers  affected:  .A,  .X,  .Y 


Description:  This  routine  LOADs  data  bytes  from  any  input  device  di- 
rectly into  the  memory  of  the  Commodore  64.  It  can  also  be  used  for  a 
/erify  operation,  comparing  data  from  a device  with  the  data  already  in 
memory,  while  leaving  the  data  stored  in  RAM  unchanged. 

The  accumulator  (.A)  must  be  set  to  0 for  a LOAD  operation,  or  1 for  a 
verify.  If  the  input  device  is  OPENed  with  a secondary  address  (SA)  of  0 
the  header  information  from  the  device  is  ignored.  In  this  case,  the  .X 
and  .Y  registers  must  contain  the  starting  address  for  the  load.  If  the 
device  is  addressed  with  a secondary  address  of  1,  then  the  data  is 
loaded  into  memory  starting  at  the  location  specified  by  the  header.  This 
routine  returns  the  address  of  the  highest  RAM  location  loaded. 

Before  this  routine  can  be  called,  the  KERNAL  SETLFS,  and  SETNAM 
routines  must  be  called. 


NOTE:  You  can  NOT  LOAD  from  the  keyboard  (0),  RS-232  (2),  or  the  screen  (3), 


How  to  Use: 

0)  Call  the  SETLFS,  and  SETNAM  routines.  If  a relocated  load  is  de- 
sired, use  the  SETLFS  routine  to  send  a secondary  address  of  0. 

1)  Set  the  .A  register  to  0 for  load,  1 for  verify. 

2)  If  a relocated  load  is  desired,  the  .X  and  ,Y  registers  must  be  set 
to  the  start  address  for  the  load. 

3)  Call  the  routine  using  the  JSR  instruction. 


286  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


EXAMPLE: 


NAME 
NAME  1 


;LOAD  A FILE  FROM  TAPE 

LDA 

#DEVICE1 

;SET  DEVICE  NUMBER 

LDX 

#FILENO 

;SET  LOGICAL  FILE  NUMBER 

LDY 

CMD1 

;SET  SECONDARY  ADDRESS 

JSR 

SETLFS 

LDA 

#NAME1-NAME 

;LOAD  .A  WITH  NUMBER  OF 
/CHARACTERS  IN  FILE  NAME 

LDX 

#<NAME 

/LOAD  .X  AND  .Y  WITH 
/ADDRESS  OF 

LDY 

#>NAME 

/FILE  NAME 

JSR 

SETNAM 

LDA 

#0 

/SET  FLAG  FOR  A LOAD 

LDX 

#$FF 

/ALTERNATE  START 

LDY 

#$FF 

JSR 

LOAD 

STX 

VARTAB 

/END  OF  LOAD 

STY 

VARTAB  + 1 

JMP 

START 

.BYT 

'FILE  NAME' 

B-16.  Function  Name:  MEMBOT 

Purpose:  Set  bottom  of  memory 

Call  address:  $FF9C  (hex)  65436  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .X,.Y 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  None 
Stack  requirements:  None 
Registers  affected:  .X,  .Y 

Description:  This  routine  is  used  to  set  the  bottom  of  the  memory.  If 
the  accumulator  carry  bit  is  set  when  this  routine  is  called,  a pointer  to 
the  lowest  byte  of  RAM  is  returned  in  the  .X  and  .Y  registers.  On  the 
unexpanded  Commodore  64  the  initial  value  of  this  pointer  is  $0800 
(2048  in  decimal).  If  the  accumulator  carry  bit  is  clear  ( = 0)  when  this 
routine  is  called,  the  values  of  the  .X  and  .Y  registers  are  transferred  to 
the  low  and  high  bytes,  respectively,  of  the  pointer  to  the  beginning  of 
RAM. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


287 


How  to  Use: 

TO  READ  THE  BOTTOM  OF  RAM 

1)  Set  the  carry. 

2)  Call  this  routine. 

TO  SET  THE  BOTTOM  OF  MEMORY 

1)  Clear  the  carry. 

2)  Call  this  routine. 

EXAMPLE: 

; MOVE  BOTTOM  OF  MEMORY  UP  1 PAGE 
SEC  ;READ  MEMORY  BOTTOM 

JSR  MEMBOT 
INY 

CLC  ;SET  MEMORY  BOTTOM  TO  NEW  VALUE 

JSR  MEMBOT 

B-l  7.  Function  Name:  MEMTOP 

Purpose:  Set  the  top  of  RAM 

Call  address:  $FF99  (hex)  65433  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .X,  .Y 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  None 
Stack  requirements:  2 
Registers  affected:  .X,  .Y 

Description:  This  routine  is  used  to  set  the  top  of  RAM.  When  this 
routine  is  called  with  the  carry  bit  of  the  accumulator  set,  the  pointer  to 
the  top  of  RAM  will  be  loaded  into  the  .X  and  .Y  registers.  When  this 
routine  is  called  with  the  accumulator  carry  bit  clear,  the  contents  of  the 
.X  and  ,Y  registers  are  loaded  in  the  top  of  memory  pointer,  changing 
the  top  of  memory. 

EXAMPLE: 

;DEALLOCATE  THE  RS-232  BUFFER 
SEC 

JSR  MEMTOP  ;READ  TOP  OF  MEMORY 

DEX 

CLC 

JSR  MEMTOP  ;SET  NEW  TOP  OF  MEMORY 


288  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


B-18.  Function  Name:  OPEN 


Purpose:  Open  a logical  file 

Call  address  $FFC0  (hex)  65472  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  None 
Preparatory  routines:  SETLFS,  SETNAM 
Error  returns:  1,2,4,5,6,240,  READST 
Stack  requirements:  None 
Registers  affected:  .A,  .X,  .Y 


Description:  This  routine  is  used  to  OPEN  a logical  file.  Once  the  logi- 
cal file  is  set  up,  it  can  be  used  for  input/output  operations.  Most  of  the 
I/O  KERNAL  routines  call  on  this  routine  to  create  the  logical  files  to 
operate  on.  No  arguments  need  to  be  set  up  to  use  this  routine,  but  both 
the  SETLFS  and  SETNAM  KERNAL  routines  must  be  called  before  using 
this  routine. 


How  to  Use: 

0)  Use  the  SETLFS  routine. 

1)  Use  the  SETNAM  routine. 

2)  Call  this  routine. 


EXAMPLE: 

This  is  an  implementation  of  the  BASIC  statement:  OPEN  15,8,1 5,"l/  O" 


LDA  #NAME2-NAME  /LENGTH  OF  FILE  NAME  FOR  SETLFS 

LDY  #>NAME  /ADDRESS  OF  FILE  NAME 

LDX  #<NAME 

JSR  SETNAM 

LDA  #15 

LDX  #8 

LDY  #15 

JSR  SETLFS 

JSR  OPEN 

.BYT  'I/O' 


NAME 

NAME2 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


289 


B-19.  Function  Name:  PLOT 


Purpose:  Set  cursor  location 

Call  address:  $FFF0  (hex)  65520  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A,  .X,  .Y 

Preparatory  routines:  None 

Error  returns:  None 

Stack  requirements:;  2 

Registers  affected:  .A,  .X,  .Y 


Description:  A call  to  this  routine  with  the  accumulator  carry  flag  set 
loads  the  current  position  of  the  cursor  on  the  screen  (in  X,Y  coordinates) 
into  the  .Y  and  .X  registers.Y  is  the  column  number  of  the  cursor  location 
(0-39),  and  X is  the  row  number  of  the  location  of  the  cursor  (0-24).  A 
call  with  the  carry  bit  clear  moves  the  cursor  to  X,  Y as  determined  by 
the  .Y  and  .X  registers. 


How  to  Use: 

READING  CURSOR  LOCATION 

1)  Set  the  carry  flag. 

2)  Call  this  routine. 

3)  Get  the  X and  Y position  from  the  .Y  and  .X  registers,  respectively. 

SETTING  CURSOR  LOCATION 

1)  Clear  carry  flag. 

2)  Set  the  .Y  and  .X  registers  to  the  desired  cursor  location. 

3)  Call  this  routine. 


EXAMPLE: 

; MOVE  THE  CURSOR  TO  ROW  10,  COLUMN  5 (5  10) 
LDX  #10 
LDY  #5 
CLC 

JSR  PLOT 


290 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


B-20.  Function  Name:  RAMTAS 

Purpose:  Perform  RAM  test 

Call  address:  $FF87  (hex)  65415  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A,  .X,  .Y 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  None 
Stack  requirements:  2 
Registers  affected:  .A,  .X,  .Y 

Description:  This  routine  is  used  to  test  RAM  and  set  the  top  and 
bottom  of  memory  pointers  accordingly.  It  also  clears  locations  $0000  to 
$0101  and  $0200  to  $03FF.  It  also  allocates  the  cassette  buffer,  and  sets 
the  screen  base  to  $0400.  Normally,  this  routine  is  called  as  part  of  the 
initialization  process  of  a Commodore  64  program  cartridge. 

EXAMPLE: 

JSR  RAMTAS 

B-21.  Function  Name:  RDTIM 

Purpose:  Read  system  clock 

Call  address:  $FFDE  (hex)  65502  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A,  .X,  .Y 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  None 
Stack  requirements:  2 
Registers  affected:  .A,  .X,  .Y 

Description:  This  routine  is  used  to  read  the  system  clock.  The  clock's 
resolution  is  a 60th  of  a second.  Three  bytes  are  returned  by  the  routine. 
The  accumulator  contains  the  most  significant  byte,  the  X index  register 
contains  the  next  most  significant  byte,  and  the  Y index  register  contains 
the  least  significant  byte. 

EXAMPLE: 

JSR  RDTIM 
STY  TIME 
STX  TIME  + 1 
STA  TIME +2 

TIME  * = *+3 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


291 


B-22.  Function  Name:  READST 


Purpose:  Read  status  word 

Call  address  $FFB7  (hex)  65463  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  None 
Stack  requirements:  2 
Registers  affected:  .A 


Description:  This  routine  returns  the  current  status  of  the  I/O  devices  in 
the  accumulator.  The  routine  is  usually  called  after  new  communication 
to  an  I/O  device.  The  routine  gives  you  information  about  device  status, 
or  errors  that  have  occurred  during  the  I/O  operation. 

The  bits  returned  in  the  accumulator  contain  the  following  information: 
(see  table  below) 


ST 

BIT 

POSITION 

ST 

NUMERIC 

VALUE 

CASSETTE 

READ 

SERIAL/RW 

TAPE 

VERIFY 

+ LOAD 

0 

1 

Time  out 

write 

1 

2 

Time  out 

read 

2 

4 

Short  block 

Short  block 

3 

8 

Long  block 

Long  block 

4 

16 

Unrecoverable 

Any 

read  error 

mismatch 

5 

32 

Checksum 

Checksum 

error 

error 

6 

64 

End  of  file 

EOI  line 

7 

-128 

End  of  tape 

Device  not 

End  of 

present 

tape 

292 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


How  to  Use: 


1)  Call  this  routine. 

2)  Decode  the  information  in  the  .A  register  as  it  refers  to  your  pro- 
gram. 

EXAMPLE: 

;CHECK  FOR  END  OF  FILE  DURING  READ 
JSR  READST 

AND  #64  ;CHECK  EOF  BIT  (EOF  = END  OF  FILE) 

BNE  EOF  /BRANCH  ON  EOF 

B-23.  Function  Name:  RESTOR 

Purpose:  Restore  default  system  and  interrupt  vectors 
Call  address:  $FF8A  (hex)  65418  (decimal) 

Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  None 
Stack  requirements  2 
Registers  affected:  .A,  .X,  .Y 

Description:  This  routine  restores  the  default  values  of  all  system  vec- 
tors used  in  KERNAL  and  BASIC  routines  and  interrupts.  The  KERNAL 
VECTOR  routine  is  used  to  read  and  alter  individual  system  vectors. 


How  to  Use: 

1)  Call  this  routine. 
EXAMPLE: 

JSR  RESTOR 


B-24.  Function  Name:  SAVE 

Purpose:  Save  memory  to  a device 
Call  address:  $FFD8  (hex)  65496  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A,.X,.Y 
Preparatory  routines:  SETLFS,  SETNAM 
Error  returns:  5,8,9,  READST 
Stack  requirements  None 
Registers  affected:  .A,  .X,  .Y 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  293 


Description:  This  routine  saves  a section  of  memory.  Memory  is  saved 
from  an  indirect  address  on  page  0 specified  by  the  accumulator  to  the 
address  stored  in  the  .X  and  .Y  registers.  It  is  then  sent  to  a logical  file 
on  an  input/output  device.  The  SETLFS  and  SETNAM  routines  must  be 
used  before  calling  this  routine.  However,  a file  name  is  not  required  to 
SAVE  to  device  1 (the  Datassette™  recorder).  Any  attempt  to  save  to 
other  devices  without  using  a file  name  results  in  an  error. 

NOTE:  Device  0 (the  keyboard),  device  2 (RS-232),  and  device  3 (the  screen)  cannot 
be  SAVEd  to.  If  the  attempt  is  made,  an  error  occurs,  and  the  SAVE  is  stopped. 


How  to  Use: 

0)  Use  the  SETLFS  routine  and  the  SETNAM  routine  (unless  a SAVE  with 
no  file  name  is  desired  on  "a  save  to  the  tape  recorder"). 

1)  Load  two  consecutive  locations  on  page  0 with  a pointer  to  the 
start  of  your  save  (in  standard  6502  low  byte  first,  high  byte  next 
format). 

2)  Load  the  accumulator  with  the  single  byte  page  zero  offset  to  the 
pointer. 

3)  Load  the  .X  and  .Y  registers  with  the  low  byte  and  high  byte  re- 
spectively of  the  location  of  the  end  of  the  save. 

4)  Call  this  routine. 

EXAMPLE: 


LDA  #1 

JSR  SETLFS 

;DEVICE  = 1 :CASSETTE 

LDA  #0 

JSR  SETNAM 

;NO  FILE  NAME 

LDA  PROG 

;LOAD  START  ADDRESS  OF  SAVE 

STA  TXTTAB 

LDA  PROG  + 1 

; (LOW  BYTE) 

STA  TXTTAB + 1 

; (HIGH  BYTE) 

LDX  VARTAB 

;LOAD  .X  WITH  LOW  BYTE  OF  END  OF  SAVE 

LDY  VARTAB + 1 

;LOAD  .Y  WITH  HIGH  BYTE 

LDA  #<TXTTAB 
JSR  SAVE 

;LOAD  ACCUMULATOR  WITH  PAGE  0 OFFSET 

294  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


B-25.  Function  Name:  SCNKEY 


Purpose:  Scan  the  keyboard 

Call  address:  $FF9F  (hex)  65439  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  None 
Preparatory  routines:  IOINIT 
Error  returns:  None 
Stack  requirements:  5 
Registers  affected:  -A,  .X,  .Y 


Description:  This  routine  scans  the  Commodore  64  keyboard  and 
checks  for  pressed  keys.  It  is  the  same  routine  called  by  the  interrupt 
handler.  If  a key  is  down,  its  ASCII  value  is  placed  in  the  keyboard 
queue.  This  routine  is  called  only  if  the  normal  IRQ  interrupt  is  bypassed. 

How  to  Use: 


1)  Call  this  routine. 

EXAMPLE: 

GET  JSR  SCNKEY 
JSR  GETIN 
CMP  #0 
BEQ  GET 
JSR  CHROUT 


SCAN  KEYBOARD 
GET  CHARACTER 
IS  IT  NULL? 

YES  . . . SCAN  AGAIN 
PRINT  IT 


B-26.  Function  Name:  SCREEN 

Purpose:  Return  screen  format 

Call  address:  $FFED  (hex)  65517  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .X,.Y 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Stack  requirements:  2 
Registers  affected:  .X,  .Y 


Description:  This  routine  returns  the  format  of  the  screen,  e.g.,  40 
columns  in  .X  and  25  lines  in  .Y.  The  routine  can  be  used  to  determine 
what  machine  a program  is  running  on.  This  function  has  been  im- 
plemented on  the  Commodore  64  to  help  upward  compatibility  of  your 
programs. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


295 


How  to  Use: 

1)  Call  this  routine. 

EXAMPLE: 

JSR  SCREEN 
STX  MAXCOL 
STY  MAXROW 

B-27.  Function  Name:  SECOND 

Purpose:  Send  secondary  address  for  LISTEN 
Call  address:  $FF93  (hex)  65427  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  -A 
Preparatory  routines:  LISTEN 
Error  returns:  See  READST 
Stack  requirements  8 
Registers  affected:  -A 

Description:  This  routine  is  used  to  send  a secondary  address  to  an 
I/O  device  after  a call  to  the  LISTEN  routine  is  made,  and  the  device  is 
commanded  to  LISTEN.  The  routine  canNOT  be  used  to  send  a second- 
ary address  after  a call  to  the  TALK  routine. 

A secondary  address  is  usually  used  to  give  setup  information  to  a 
device  before  I/O  operations  begin. 

When  a secondary  address  is  to  be  sent  to  a device  on  the  serial  bus, 
the  address  must  first  be  ORed  with  $60. 

How  to  Use: 

1)  Load  the  accumulator  with  the  secondary  address  to  be  sent. 

2)  Call  this  routine. 

EXAMPLE: 

;ADDRESS  DEVICE  #8  WITH  COMMAND  (SECONDARY  ADDRESS)  #15 

LDA  #8 

JSR  LISTEN 

LDA  #$60+15 

JSR  SECOND 


296  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


B-28.  Function  Name:  SETLFS 


Purpose:  Set  up  a logical  file 

Call  address:  $FFBA  (hex)  65466  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A,  .X,  .Y 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  None 
Stack  requirements:  2 
Registers  affected:  None 

Description:  This  routine  sets  the  logical  file  number,  device  address, 
and  secondary  address  (command  number)  for  other  KERNAL  routines. 

The  logical  file  number  is  used  by  the  system  as  a key  to  the  file  table 
created  by  the  OPEN  file  routine.  Device  addresses  can  range  from  0 to 
31.  The  following  codes  are  used  by  the  Commodore  64  to  stand  for  the 
CBM  devices  listed  below: 

ADDRESS  DEVICE 


0 Keyboard 

1 Datassette™  #1 

2 RS-232C  device 

3 CRT  display 

4 Serial  bus  printer 

8 CBM  serial  bus  disk  drive 


Device  numbers  4 or  greater  automatically  refer  to  devices  on  the 
serial  bus. 

A command  to  the  device  is  sent  as  a secondary  address  on  the  serial 
bus  after  the  device  number  is  sent  during  the  serial  attention  handshak- 
ing sequence.  If  no  secondary  address  is  to  be  sent,  the  .Y  index  regis- 
ter should  be  set  to  255. 

How  to  Use: 

1)  Load  the  accumulator  with  the  logical  file  number. 

2)  Load  the  .X  index  register  with  the  device  number. 

3)  Load  the  .Y  index  register  with  the  command. 


EXAMPLE: 


FOR  LOGICAL  FILE  32,  DEVICE  #4,  AND  NO  COMMAND: 
LDA  #32 
LDX  #4 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


297 


LDY  #255 
JSR  SETLFS 

B-29.  Function  Name:  SETMSG 

Purpose:  Control  system  message  output 
Call  address:  $FF90  (hex)  65424  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns  None 
Stack  requirements:  2 
Registers  affected:  .A 

Description:  This  routine  controls  the  printing  of  error  and  control  mes- 
sages by  the  KERNAL.  Either  print  error  messages  or  print  control  mes- 
sages can  be  selected  by  setting  the  accumulator  when  the  routine  is 
called.  FILE  NOT  FOUND  is  an  example  of  an  error  message.  PRESS 
PLAY  ON  CASSETTE  is  an  example  of  a control  message. 

Bits  6 and  7 of  this  value  determine  where  the  message  will  come 
from.  If  bit  7 is  1,  one  of  the  error  messages  from  the  KERNAL  is  printed. 
If  bit  6 is  set,  control  messages  are  printed. 

How  to  Use: 

1)  Set  accumulator  to  desired  value. 

2)  Call  this  routine. 

EXAMPLE: 

LDA  #$40 
JSR  SETMSG 
LDA  #$80 
JSR  SETMSG 
LDA  #0 
JSR  SETMSG 

B-30.  Function  Name:  SETNAM 

Purpose:  Set  up  file  name 
Call  address:  $FFBD  (hex)  65469  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A,  .X,  .Y 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Stack  requirements:  None 
Registers  affected:  None 


;TURN  ON  CONTROL  MESSAGES 
;TURN  ON  ERROR  MESSAGES 
;TURN  OFF  ALL  KERNAL  MESSAGES 


298  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


Description:  This  routine  is  used  to  set  up  the  file  name  for  the  OPEN, 
SAVE,  or  LOAD  routines.  The  accumulator  must  be  loaded  with  the 
length  of  the  file  name.  The  .X  and  .Y  registers  must  be  loaded  with  the 
address  of  the  file  name,  in  standard  6502  low- byte/high- byte  format. 
The  address  can  be  any  valid  memory  address  in  the  system  where  a 
string  of  characters  for  the  file  name  is  stored.  If  no  file  name  is  desired, 
the  accumulator  must  be  set  to  0,  representing  a zero  file  length.  The  .X 
and  .Y  registers  can  be  set  to  any  memory  address  in  that  case. 

How  to  Use: 

1)  Load  the  accumulator  with  the  length  of  the  file  name. 

2)  Load  the  .X  index  register  with  the  low  order  address  of  the  file 
name. 

3)  Load  the  .Y  index  register  with  the  high  order  address. 

4)  Call  this  routine. 

EXAMPLE: 

LDA  #NAME2-NAME  ;LOAD  LENGTH  OF  FILE  NAME 
LDX  #<NAME  ;LOAD  ADDRESS  OF  FILE  NAME 

LDY  #>NAME 
JSR  SETNAM 

B-31.  Function  Name:  SETTIM 

Purpose:  Set  the  system  clock 

Call  address:  $FFDB  (hex)  65499  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A,  .X,  .Y 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  None 
Stack  requirements:  2 
Registers  affected:  None 

Description:  A system  clock  is  maintained  by  an  interrupt  routine  that 
updates  the  clock  every  1 / 60th  of  a second  (one  "jiffy").  The  clock  is 
three  bytes  long,  which  gives  it  the  capability  to  count  up  to  5,184,000 
jiffies  (24  hours).  At  that  point  the  clock  resets  to  zero.  Before  calling  this 
routine  to  set  the  clock,  the  accumulator  must  contain  the  most 
significant  byte,  the  .X  index  register  the  next  most  significant  byte,  and 
the  .Y  index  register  the  least  significant  byte  of  the  initial  time  setting 
(in  jiffies). 

How  to  Use: 

1)  Load  the  accumulator  with  the  MSB  of  the  3-byte  number  to  set  the 
clock. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


299 


2)  Load  the  .X  register  with  the  next  byte. 

3)  Load  the  ,Y  register  with  the  LSB. 

4)  Call  this  routine. 

EXAMPLE: 

;SET  THE  CLOCK  TO  10  MINUTES  = 3600  JIFFIES 
LDA  #0  ; MOST  SIGNIFICANT 

LDX  #>3600 

LDY  #<3600  ; LEAST  SIGNIFICANT 

JSR  SETTIM 

B-32.  Function  Name:  SETTMO 

Purpose:  Set  IEEE  bus  card  timeout  flag 
Call  address:  $FFA2  (hex)  65442  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  None 
Stack  requirements  2 
Registers  affected:  None 

NOTE:  This  routine  is  used  ONLY  with  an  IEEE  add-on  card! 

Description:  This  routine  sets  the  timeout  flag  for  the  IEEE  bus.  When 
the  timeout  flag  is  set,  the  Commodore  64  will  wait  for  a device  on  the 
IEEE  port  for  64  milliseconds.  If  the  device  does  not  respond  to  the 
Commodore  64's  Data  Address  Valid  (DAV)  signal  within  that  time  the 
Commodore  64  will  recognize  an  error  condition  and  leave  the  hand- 
shake sequence.  When  this  routine  is  called  when  the  accumulator  con- 
tains a 0 in  bit  7,  timeouts  are  enabled.  A 1 in  bit  7 will  disable  the 
timeouts. 


NOTE:  The  Commodore  64/Executive  64  uses  the  timeout  feature  to  communicate  that 
a disk  file  is  not  found  on  an  attempt  to  OPEN  a file  only  with  an  IEEE  card. 

How  to  Use: 

TO  SET  THE  TIMEOUT  FLAG 

1)  Set  bit  7 of  the  accumulator  to  0. 

2)  Call  this  routine. 

TO  RESET  THE  TIMEOUT  FLAG 

1)  Set  bit  7 of  the  accumulator  to  1. 

2)  Call  this  routine. 


300 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


EXAMPLE: 


/DISABLE  TIMEOUT 
LDA  #0 
JSR  SETTMO 


B-33.  Function  Name:  STOP 


Purpose:  Check  if  'EQS9  key  is 
Call  address:  $FFE1  (hex)  65505 
Communication  registers:  .A 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  None 
Stack  requirements:  None 
Reaisters  affected:  .A,  .X 


pressed 

(decimal) 


Description:  If  the  key  on  the  keyboard  was  pressed  during 

a UDTIAA  call,  this  call  returns  the  Z flag  set.  In  addition,  the  channels 
will  be  reset  to  default  values.  All  other  flags  remain  unchanged.  If 
the  key  is  not  pressed  then  the  accumulator  will  contain  a byte 

representing  the  last  row  of  the  keyboard  scan.  The  user  can  also  check 
for  certain  other  keys  this  way. 

How  to  Use: 

0)  UDTIAA  should  be  called  before  this  routine. 

1)  Call  this  routine. 

2)  Test  for  the  zero  flag. 

EXAMPLE: 

JSR  UDTIM  /SCAN  FOR  STOP 
JSR  STOP 

BNE  * +5  /KEY  NOT  DOWN 
JMP  READY  /=  . . . STOP 

B-34.  Function  Name:  TALK 

Purpose:  Command  a device  on  the  serial  bus  to  TALK 
Call  address:  $FFB4  (hex)  65460  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  See  READST 
Stack  requirements  8 
Registers  affected:  .A 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


301 


Description:  To  use  this  routine  the  accumulator  must  first  be  loaded 
with  a device  number  between  0 and  31.  When  called,  this  routine  then 
ORs  bit  by  bit  to  convert  this  device  number  to  a talk  address.  Then  this 
data  is  transmitted  as  a command  on  the  serial  bus. 

How  to  Use: 

1)  Load  the  accumulator  with  the  device  number. 

2)  Call  this  routine. 

EXAMPLE: 

;COMMAND  DEVICE  #4  TO  TALK 
LDA  #4 
JSR  TALK 

B-35.  Function  Name:  TKSA 

Purpose:  Send  a secondary  address  to  a device  commanded  to  TALK 
Call  address:  $FF96  (hex)  65430  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .A 
Preparatory  routines:  TALK 
Error  returns:  See  READST 
Stack  requirements:  8 
Registers  affected:  .A 

Description  This  routine  transmits  a secondary  address  on  the  serial 
bus  for  a TALK  device.  This  routine  must  be  called  with  a number  be- 
tween 0 and  31  in  the  accumulator.  The  routine  sends  this  number  as  a 
secondary  address  command  over  the  serial  bus.  This  routine  can  only 
be  called  after  a call  to  the  TALK  routine.  It  will  not  work  after  a LISTEN. 

How  to  Use: 

0)  Use  the  TALK  routine. 

1)  Load  the  accumulator  with  the  secondary  address. 

2)  Call  this  routine. 

EXAMPLE: 

;TELL  DEVICE  #4  TO  TALK  WITH  COMMAND  #7 

LDA  #4 

JSR  TALK 

LDA  #7 

JSR  TALKSA 


302  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


B-36.  Function  Name:  UDTIM 

Purpose  Update  the  system  clock 

Call  address:  $FFEA  (hex)  65514  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  None 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  None 
Stack  requirements:.  2 
Registers  affected:  .A,  .X 

Description:  This  routine  updates  the  system  clock.  Normally  this 
routine  is  called  by  the  normal  KERNAL  interrupt  routine  every  1 /60th  of 
a second.  If  the  user  program  processes  its  own  interrupts  this  routine 
must  be  called  to  update  the  time.  In  addition,  the  key  routine 

must  be  called,  if  the  key  is  to  remain  functional. 

How  to  Use: 

1)  Call  this  routine. 

EXAMPLE: 

JSR  UDTIM 

B-37.  Function  Name:  UNLSN 

Purpose:  Send  an  UNLISTEN  command 
Call  address:  $FFAE  (hex)  65454  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  None 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  See  READST 
Stack  requirements:  8 
Registers  affected:  .A 

Description:  This  routine  commands  all  devices  on  the  serial  bus  to 
stop  receiving  data  from  the  Commodore  64  (i.e.,  UNLISTEN).  Calling 
this  routine  results  in  an  UNLISTEN  command  being  transmitted  on  the 
serial  bus.  Only  devices  previously  commanded  to  listen  are  affected. 
This  routine  is  normally  used  after  the  Commodore  64  is  finished  sending 
data  to  external  devices.  Sending  the  UNLISTEN  commands  the  listening 
devices  to  get  off  the  serial  bus  so  it  can  be  used  for  other  purposes. 

How  to  Use: 

1)  Call  this  routine. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  303 


EXAMPLE: 


JSR  UNLSN 

B-38.  Function  Name:  UNTLK 

Purpose:  Send  an  UNTALK  command 
Call  address:  $FFAB  (hex)  65451  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  None 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  See  READST 
Stack  requirements:  8 
Registers  affected:  .A 


Description:  This  routine  transmits  an  UNTALK  command  on  the  serial 
bus.  All  devices  previously  set  to  TALK  will  stop  sending  data  when  this 
command  is  received. 

How  to  Use: 

1)  Call  this  routine. 

EXAMPLE: 

JSR  UNTALK 


B-39.  Function  Name:  VECTOR 

Purpose:  Manage  RAM  vectors 

Call  address:  $FF8D  (hex)  65421  (decimal) 

Communication  registers:  .X,.Y 
Preparatory  routines:  None 
Error  returns:  None 
Stack  requirements:  2 
Registers  affected:  .A,  .X,  .Y 


Description:  This  routine  manages  all  system  vector  jump  addresses 
stored  in  RAM.  Calling  this  routine  with  the  the  accumulator  carry  bit  set 
stores  the  current  contents  of  the  RAM  vectors  in  a list  pointed  to  by  the 
.X  and  .Y  registers.  When  this  routine  is  called  with  the  carry  clear,  the 
user  list  pointed  to  by  the  .X  and  .Y  registers  is  transferred  to  the  system 
RAM  vectors.  The  RAM  vectors  are  listed  in  the  memory  map. 


304  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


SYSTEM  RAM  VECTORS  LISTING 


RETURNED  LOCATION 

[LOW  BYTE] 

VECTOR 

[HIGH  BYTE] 

.X  + 256  * .Y 

+ 0 

CINV 

+ 1 

+ 2 

CBINV 

+ 3 

+ 4 

NMINV 

+ 5 

+ 6 

IOPEN 

+ 7 

+ 8 

ICLOSE 

+ 9 

+ 10 

ICHKIN 

+ 11 

+ 12 

ICHOUT 

+ 13 

+ 14 

ICLRCH 

+ 15 

+ 16 

IBASIN 

+ 17 

+ 18 

IBSOUT 

+ 19 

+ 20 

ISTOP 

+ 21 

+ 22 

IGETIN 

+ 23 

+ 24 

ICLALL 

+ 25 

+ 26 

USRCMD 

+ 27 

+ 28 

ILOAD 

+ 29 

+ 30 

ISAVE 

+ 31 

TOTAL  BYTES:  32 

(for  explandation  of  individual  vectors,  see  page  319) 


NOTE:  This  routine  requires  caution  in  its  use.  The  best  way  to  use  it  is  to  first  read  the 
entire  vector  contents  into  the  user  area,  alter  the  desired  vectors,  and  then  copy  the 
contents  back  to  the  system  vectors. 


How  to  Use: 

READ  THE  SYSTEM  RAM  VECTORS 

1)  Set  the  carry. 

2)  Set  the  .X  and  .y  registers  to  the  address  to  put  the  vectors. 

3)  Call  this  routine. 


LOAD  THE  SYSTEM  RAM  VECTORS 

1)  Clear  the  carry  bit. 

2)  Set  the  .X  and  .Y  registers  to  the  address  of  the  vector  list  in  RAM 
that  must  be  loaded. 

3)  Call  this  routine. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  305 


EXAMPLE: 


;READ  OLD  VECTORS 
;CHANGE  CHKIN  VECTOR 


;CHANGE  THE  INPUT  ROUTINES  TO  NEW  SYSTEM 
LDX  #<USER 
LDY  #>USER 
SEC 

JSR  VECTOR 
LDA  #<MYINP 
STA  USER-MO 
LDA  #>MYINP 
STA  USER+11 
LDX  #<USER 
LDY  #>USER 
CLC 

JSR  VECTOR  ;ALTER  SYSTEM 


USER  * = * + 32 

ERROR  CODES 


The  following  is  a list  of  error  messages  which  can  occur  when  using 
the  KERNAL  routines.  If  an  error  occurs  during  a KERNAL  routine,  the 
carry  bit  of  the  accumulator  is  set,  and  the  number  of  the  error  message 
is  returned  in  the  accumulator. 


NOTE:  Some  KERNAL  I/O  routines  do  not  use  these  codes  for  error  messages.  Instead, 
errors  are  identified  using  the  KERNAL  READST  routine. 


NUMBER 

MEANING 

0 

Routine  terminated  by  the  key 

1 

Too  many  open  files 

2 

File  already  open 

3 

File  not  open 

4 

File  not  found 

5 

Device  not  present 

6 

File  is  not  an  input  file 

7 

File  is  not  an  output  file 

8 

File  name  is  missing 

9 

Illegal  device  number 

240 

Top-of-memory  change  RS-232  buffer  allocation/deallocation 

306  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


USING  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  FROM  BASIC 


There  are  several  methods  of  using  BASIC  and  machine  language  on 
the  Commodore  64,  including  special  statements  as  part  of  CBM  BASIC 
as  well  as  key  locations  in  the  machine.  There  are  five  main  ways  to  use 
machine  language  routines  from  BASIC  on  the  Commodore  64.  They 
are: 


1)  The  BASIC  SYS  statement 

2)  The  BASIC  USR  function 

3)  Changing  one  of  the  RAM  I/O  vectors 

4)  Changing  one  of  the  RAM  interrupt  vectors 

5)  Changing  the  CHRGET  routine 


1)  The  BASIC  statement  SYS  X causes  a JUMP  to  a machine  language 
subroutine  located  at  address  X.  The  routine  must  end  with  an  RTS 
(ReTurn  from  Subroutine)  instruction.  This  will  transfer  control  back 
to  BASIC. 

Parameters  are  generally  passed  between  the  machine  lan- 
guage routine  and  the  BASIC  program  using  the  BASIC  PEEK  and 
POKE  statements,  and  their  machine  language  equivalents. 

The  SYS  command  is  the  most  useful  method  of  combining 
BASIC  with  machine  language.  PEEKs  and  POKEs  make  multiple 
parameter  passing  easy.  There  can  be  many  SYS  statements  in  a 
program,  each  to  a different  (or  even  the  same)  machine  lan- 
guage routine. 

2)  The  BASIC  function  USR(X)  transfers  control  to  the  machine  lan- 
guage subroutine  located  at  the  address  stored  in  locations  785 
and  786.  (The  address  is  stored  in  standard  low-byte/high-byte 
format.)  The  value  X is  evaluated  and  passed  to  the  machine  lan- 
guage subroutine  through  floating  point  accumulator  #1,  located 
beginning  at  address  $61  (see  memory  map  for  more  details).  A 
value  may  be  returned  back  to  the  BASIC  program  by  placing  it  in 
the  floating  point  accumulator.  The  machine  language  routine  must 
end  with  an  RTS  instruction  to  return  to  BASIC. 

This  statement  is  different  from  the  SYS,  because  you  have  to  set 
up  an  indirect  vector.  Also  different  is  the  format  through  which 
the  variable  is  passed  (floating  point  format).  The  indirect  vector 
must  be  changed  if  more  than  one  machine  language  routine  is 
used. 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  307 


3)  Any  of  the  input/output  or  BASIC  internal  routines  accessed  through 
the  vector  table  located  on  page  3 can  be  replaced,  or  amended 
by  user  code.  Each  2-byte  vector  consists  of  a low  byte  and  a high 
byte  address  which  is  used  by  the  operating  system. 

The  KERNAL  VECTOR  routine  is  the  most  reliable  way  to  change 
any  of  the  vectors,  but  a single  vector  can  be  changed  by  POKEs. 
A new  vector  will  point  to  a user  prepared  routine  which  is  meant 
to  replace  or  augment  the  standard  system  routine.  When  the  ap- 
propriate BASIC  command  is  executed,  the  user  routine  will  be 
executed.  If  after  executing  the  user  routine,  it  is  necessary  to  exe- 
cute the  normal  system  routine,  the  user  program  must  JMP  (JuMP) 
to  the  address  formerly  contained  in  the  vector.  If  not,  the  routine 
must  end  with  a RTS  to  transfer  control  back  to  BASIC. 

4)  The  HARDWARE  INTERRUPT  (IRQ)  VECTOR  can  be  changed.  Every 
l/60th  of  a second,  the  operating  system  transfers  control  to  the 
routine  specified  by  this  vector.  The  KERNAL  normally  uses  this  for 
timing,  keyboard  scanning,  etc.  If  this  technique  is  used,  you 
should  always  transfer  control  to  the  normal  IRQ  handling  routine, 
unless  the  replacement  routine  is  prepared  to  handle  the  CIA  chip. 
(REMEMBER  to  end  the  routine  with  an  RTI  (ReTurn  from  Interrupt). 

This  method  is  useful  for  tasks  which  must  happen  concurrently 
with  a BASIC  program,  but  has  the  drawback  of  being  more 
difficult. 


NOTE:  ALWAYS  DISABLE  INTERRUPTS  BEFORE  CHANGING  THIS  VECTOR! 


5)  The  CHRGET  routine  is  used  by  BASIC  to  get  each  character/token. 
This  makes  it  simple  to  add  new  BASIC  commands.  Naturally, 
each  new  command  must  be  executed  by  a user  written  machine 
language  subroutine.  A common  way  to  use  this  method  is  to 
specify  a character  (@  for  example)  which  will  occur  before  any  of 
the  new  commands.  The  new  CHRGET  routine  will  search  for  the 
special  character.  If  none  is  present,  control  is  passed  to  the  nor- 
mal BASIC  CHRGET  routine.  If  the  special  character  is  present,  the 
new  command  is  interpreted  and  executed  by  your  machine  lan- 
guage program.  This  minimizes  the  extra  execution  time  added  by 
the  need  to  search  for  additional  commands.  This  technique  is 
often  called  a wedge. 


308  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


WHERE  TO  PUT  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  ROUTINES 


The  best  place  for  machine  language  routines  on  the  Commodore  64 
is  from  $C000-$CFFF,  assuming  the  routines  are  smaller  than  4K  bytes 
long.  This  section  of  memory  is  not  disturbed  by  BASIC. 

If  for  some  reason  it's  not  possible  or  desirable  to  put  the  machine 
language  routine  at  $C000,  for  instance  if  the  routine  is  larger  than  4K 
bytes,  it  then  becomes  necessary  to  reserve  an  area  at  the  top  of  mem- 
ory from  BASIC  for  the  routine.  The  top  of  memory  is  normally  $9FFF. 
The  top  of  memory  can  be  changed  through  the  KERNAL  routine 
MEMTOP,  or  by  the  following  BASIC  statements: 

10  POKE51/L:POKE52/H:POKE55,L:POKE56,H:CLR 

Where  H and  L are  the  high  and  low  portions,  respectively,  of  the  new 
top  of  memory.  For  example,  to  reserve  the  area  from  $9000  to  $9FFF 
for  machine  language,  use  the  following: 

10  POKE51 ,0:POKE52, 144:POKE55,0:POKE56, 144:CLR 

HOW  TO  ENTER  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 

There  are  3 common  methods  to  add  the  machine  language  pro- 
grams to  a BASIC  program.  They  are: 

1 ) DATA  STATEMENTS: 

By  READing  DATA  statements,  and  POKEing  the  values  into  memory  at 
the  start  of  the  program,  machine  language  routines  can  be  added.  This 
is  the  easiest  method.  No  special  methods  are  needed  to  save  the  two 
parts  of  the  program,  and  it  is  fairly  easy  to  debug.  The  drawbacks 
include  taking  up  more  memory  space,  and  the  wait  while  the  program 
is  POKEd  in.  Therefore,  this  method  is  better  for  smaller  routines. 

EXAMPLE: 

10  RESTORE:FORX=lTO9:READA:POKE12*4096+X,A:NEXT 

BASIC  PROGRAM 


1000  DATA  161,1,204,204,204,204,204,204,96 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


309 


2)  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  MONITOR  (64MON): 

This  program  allows  you  to  enter  a program  in  either  HEX  or  SYM- 
BOLIC codes,  and  save  the  portion  of  memory  the  program  is  in.  Advan- 
tages of  this  method  include  easier  entry  of  the  machine  language 
routines,  debugging  aids,  and  a much  faster  means  of  saving  and  load- 
ing. The  drawback  to  this  method  is  that  it  generally  requires  the  BASIC 
program  to  load  the  machine  language  routine  from  tape  or  disk  when 
it  is  started.  (For  more  details  on  64MON  see  the  machine  language 
section.) 

EXAMPLE: 

The  following  is  an  example  of  a BASIC  program  using  a machine 
language  routine  prepared  by  64MON.  The  routine  is  stored  on  tape: 

10  IF  FLAG  = 1 THEN  20 

15  FLAG=l:LOAD  "MACHINE  LANGUAGE  ROUTINE  NAME",  1,1 

20 


REST  OF  BASIC  PROGRAM 
3)  EDITOR/ASSEMBLER  PACKAGE: 

Advantages  are  similar  to  using  a machine  language  monitor,  but 
programs  are  even  easier  to  enter.  Disadvantages  are  also  similar  to  the 
use  of  a machine  language  monitor. 


COMMODORE  64  MEMORY  MAP 


LABEL 

HEX 

ADDRESS 

DECIMAL 

LOCATION 

DESCRIPTION 

D6510 

0000 

0 

6510  On-Chip  Data- 
Direction  Register 

R6510 

0001 

1 

6510  On-Chip  8-Bit 
Input/Output  Register 

0002 

2 

Unused 

ADRAY1 

0003-0004 

3-4 

Jump  Vector:  Convert 
Floating  — Integer 

310  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


LABEL 

HEX 

ADDRESS 

DECIMAL 

LOCATION 

DESCRIPTION 

ADRAY2 

0005-0006 

5-6 

Jump  Vector:  Convert 
Integer — Floating 

CHARAC 

0007 

7 

Search  Character 

ENDCHR 

0008 

8 

Flag:  Scan  for  Quote  at 
End  of  String 

TRMPOS 

0009 

9 

Screen  Column  From  Last 

TAB 

VERCK 

000A 

10 

Flag:  0 = Load,  1 = Ver- 
ify 

COUNT 

000B 

11 

Input  Buffer  Pointer  / No. 
of  Subscripts 

DIMFLG 

OOOC 

12 

Flag:  Default  Array  Dl- 
Mension 

VALTYP 

000D 

13 

Data  Type:  $FF  = String, 
$00  = Numeric 

INTFLG 

000E 

14 

Data  Type:  $80  = Integer, 
$00  = Floating 

GARBFL 

000F 

15 

Flag:  DATA  scan/LIST 
quote/Garbage  Coll 

SUBFLG 

0010 

16 

Flag:  Subscript  Ref  / User 
Function  Call 

INPFLG 

0011 

17 

Flag:  $00  = INPUT,  $40 
= GET,  $98  = READ 

TANSGN 

0012 

18 

Flag:  TAN  sign  / Compari- 
son Result 

0013 

19 

Flag:  INPUT  Prompt 

LINNUM 

0014-0015 

20-21 

Temp:  Integer  Value 

TEMPPT 

0016 

22 

Pointer:  Temporary  String 
Stack 

LASTPT 

0017-0018 

23-24 

Last  Temp  String  Address 

TEMPST 

0019-0021 

25-33 

Stack  for  Temporary 

Strings 

INDEX 

0022-0025 

34-37 

Utility  Pointer  Area 

RESHO 

0026 -002 A 

38-42 

Floating-Point  Product  of 
Multiply 

TXTTAB 

002B-002C 

43-44 

Pointer:  Start  of  BASIC 

Text 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


311 


LABEL 

HEX 

ADDRESS 

DECIMAL 

LOCATION 

DESCRIPTION 

VARTAB 

002 D— 002  E 

45-46 

Pointer:  Start  of  BASIC 
Variables 

ARYTAB 

002F-0030 

47-48 

Pointer:  Start  of  BASIC 
Arrays 

STREND 

0031-0032 

49-50 

Pointer:  End  of  BASIC  Ar- 
rays (+1) 

FRETOP 

0033-0034 

51-52 

Pointer:  Bottom  of  String 
Storage 

FRESPC 

0035-0036 

53-54 

Utility  String  Pointer 

MEMSIZ 

0037-0038 

55-56 

Pointer:  Highest  Address 
Used  by  BASIC 

CURLIN 

0039- 003A 

57-58 

Current  BASIC  Line 

Number 

OLDLIN 

003B-003C 

59-60 

Previous  BASIC  Line 

Number 

OLDTXT 

003D-003E 

61-62 

Pointer:  BASIC  Statement 
for  CONT 

DATLIN 

003F-0040 

63-64 

Current  DATA  Line 

Number 

DATPTR 

0041-0042 

65-66 

Pointer:  Current  DATA 

Item  Address 

INPPTR 

0043-0044 

67-68 

Vector:  INPUT  Routine 

VARNAM 

0045-0046 

69-70 

Current  BASIC  Variable 
Name 

VARPNT 

0047-0048 

71-72 

Pointer:  Current  BASIC 
Variable  Data 

FORPNT 

0049-004A 

73-74 

Pointer:  Index  Variable 
for  FOR/NEXT 

FACEXP 

004B-0060 

75-96 

Temp  Pointer  / Data  Area 

0061 

97 

Floating-Point  Accumu- 
lator #1:  Exponent 

FACHO 

0062-0065 

98-101 

Floating  Accum.  #1: 
Mantissa 

FACSGN 

0066 

102 

Floating  Accum.  #1:  Sign 

SGNFLG 

0067 

103 

Pointer:  Series  Evaluation 
Constant 

312  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


LABEL 

HEX 

ADDRESS 

DECIMAL 

LOCATION 

DESCRIPTION 

BITS 

0068 

104 

Floating  Accum.  #1: 
Overflow  Digit 

ARGEXP 

0069 

105 

Floating-Point  Accumu- 
lator #2:  Exponent 

ARGHO 

006A-006D 

106-109 

Floating  Accum.  #2: 
Mantissa 

ARGSGN 

006 E 

110 

Floating  Accum.  #2:  Sign 

ARISGN 

006F 

111 

Sign  Comparison  Result: 
Accum.  #1  vs  #2 

FACOV 

0070 

112 

Floating  Accum.  #1. 
Low-Order  (Rounding) 

FBUFPT 

0071-0072 

113-114 

Pointer:  Cassette  Buffer 

CHRGET 

0073 -008 A 

115-138 

Subroutine:  Get  Next  Byte 
of  BASIC  Text 

CHRGOT 

0079 

121 

Entry  to  Get  Same  Byte  of 
Text  Again 

TXTPTR 

007A-007B 

122-123 

Pointer:  Current  Byte  of 
BASIC  Text 

RNDX 

008B-008F 

139-143 

Floating  RND  Function 

Seed  Value 

STATUS 

0090 

144 

Kernal  I/O  Status 

Word:  ST 

STKEY 

0091 

145 

Flag:  STOP  key  / RVS  key 

SVXT 

0092 

146 

Timing  Constant  for  Tape 

VERCK 

0093 

147 

Flag:  0 = Load,  1 = Ver- 
ify 

C3PO 

0094 

148 

Flag:  Serial  Bus — Output 
Char.  Buffered 

BSOUR 

0095 

149 

Buffered  Character  for 
Serial  Bus 

SYNO 

0096 

150 

Cassette  Sync  No. 

0097 

151 

Temp  Data  Area 

LDTND 

0098 

152 

No.  of  Open  Files  / Index 
to  File  Table 

DFLTN 

0099 

153 

Default  Input  Device  (0) 

DFLTO 

009A 

154 

Default  Output  (CMD) 
Device  (3) 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  313 


LABEL 

HEX 

ADDRESS 

DECIMAL 

LOCATION 

DESCRIPTION 

PRTY 

009B 

155 

Tape  Character  Parity 

DPSW 

009C 

156 

Flag:  Tape  Byte-Received 

MSGFLG 

009D 

157 

Flag:  $80  = Direct  Mode, 
$00  = Program 

PTR1 

009E 

158 

Tape  Pass  1 Error  Log 

PTR2 

009F 

159 

Tape  Pass  2 Error  Log 

TIME 

00  AO— 00  A2 

160-162 

Real-Time  Jiffy  Clock 
(approx)  1/60  Sec 

00A3-00A4 

163-164 

Temp  Data  Area 

CNTDN 

00A5 

165 

Cassette  Sync  Countdown 

BUFPNT 

00A6 

166 

Pointer:  Tape  I/O  Buffer 

INBIT 

00A7 

167 

RS-232  Input  Bits  / Cas- 
sette Temp 

BITCI 

00A8 

168 

RS-232  Input  Bit  Count  / 
Cassette  Temp 

RINONE 

00A9 

169 

RS-232  Flag:  Check  for 
Start  Bit 

RIDATA 

OOAA 

170 

RS-232  Input  Byte 
Buffer/Cassette  Temp 

RIPRTY 

00  A B 

171 

RS-232  Input  Parity  / Cas- 
sette Short  Cnt 

SAL 

00AC-00AD 

172-173 

Pointer:  Tape  Buffer/ 

Screen  Scrolling 

EAL 

OOAE-OOAF 

174-175 

Tape  End  Addresses/End 
of  Program 

CMPO 

00B0-00B1 

176-177 

Tape  Timing  Constants 

TAPE1 

00B2-00B3 

178-179 

Pointer:  Start  of  Tape  Buf- 
fer 

BITTS 

00B4 

180 

RS-232  Out  Bit  Count  / 
Cassette  Temp 

NXTBIT 

00B5 

181 

RS-232  Next  Bit  to  Send/ 
Tape  EOT  Flag 

RODATA 

00B6 

182 

RS-232  Out  Byte  Buffer 

FNLEN 

00B7 

183 

Length  of  Current  File 
Name 

LA 

00B8 

184 

Current  Logical  File 
Number 

314  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


LABEL 

HEX 

ADDRESS 

DECIMAL 

LOCATION 

DESCRIPTION 

SA 

00B9 

185 

Current  Secondary  Ad- 
dress 

FA 

00  BA 

186 

Current  Device  Number 

FNADR 

00BB-00BC 

187-188 

Pointer:  Current  File 

Name 

ROPRTY 

OOBD 

189 

RS-232  Out  Parity  / Cas- 
sette Temp 

FSBLK 

OOBE 

190 

Cassette  Read/Write  Block 
Count 

MYCH 

OOBF 

191 

Serial  Word  Buffer 

CAS1 

OOCO 

192 

Tape  Motor  Interlock 

STAL 

00C1-00C2 

193-194 

I/O  Start  Address 

MEMUSS 

00C3-00C4 

195-196 

Tape  Load  Temps 

LSTX 

00C5 

197 

Current  Key  Pressed: 

64  = No  Key 

NDX 

00C6 

198 

No.  of  Chars,  in 

Keyboard  Buffer 
(Queue) 

RVS 

00C7 

199 

Flag:  Print  Reverse 

Chars.  — 1 =Yes/  0 = No 
Used 

INDX 

00C8 

200 

Pointer:  End  of  Logical 

Line  for  INPUT 

LXSP 

00C9-00CA 

201-202 

Cursor  X-Y  Pos.  at  Start  of 
INPUT 

SFDX 

OOCB 

203 

64  = No  Key 

BLNSW 

OOCC 

204 

Cursor  Blink  enable:  0 = 

Flash  Cursor 

BLNCT 

OOCD 

205 

Timer:  Countdown  to 

Toggle  Cursor 

GDBLN 

OOCE 

206 

Character  Under  Cursor 

BLNON 

OOCF 

207 

Flag:  Last  Cursor  Blink 
On/Off 

CRSW 

OODO 

208 

Flag:  INPUT  or  GET  from 
Keyboard 

PNT 

00D1-00D2 

209-210 

Pointer:  Current  Screen 

Line  Address 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


315 


LABEL 

HEX 

ADDRESS 

DECIMAL 

LOCATION 

DESCRIPTION 

PNTR 

00D3 

211 

Cursor  Column  on  Current 
Line 

QTSW 

00D4 

212 

Flag:  Editor  in  Quote 
Mode,  $00  = NO 

LNMX 

00D5 

213 

Physical  Screen  Line 

Length 

TBLX 

00D6 

214 

Current  Cursor  Physical 

Line  Number 

00D7 

215 

Temp  Data  Area 

INSRT 

00D8 

216 

Flag:  Insert  Mode,  >0  = 

# INSTs 

LDTB1 

00D9-00F2 

217-242 

Screen  Line  Link  Table  / 
Editor  Temps 

USER 

00F3-00F4 

243-244 

Pointer:  Current  Screen 
Color  RAM  loc. 

KEYTAB 

00F5-00F6 

245-246 

Vector:  Keyboard  Decode 
Table 

RIBUF 

00F7-00F8 

247-248 

RS-232  Input  Buffer 

Pointer 

ROBUF 

00F9-00FA 

249-250 

RS-232  Output  Buffer 
Pointer 

FREKZP 

00FB-00FE 

251-254 

Free  0-Page  Space  for 

User  Programs 

BASZPT 

OOFF 

255 

BASIC  Temp  Data  Area 

0100—01 FF 

256-511 

Micro-Processor  System 
Stack  Area 

0100-010A 

256-266 

Floating  to  String  Work 
Area 

BAD 

0100-013E 

256-318 

Tape  Input  Error  Log 

BUF 

0200-0258 

512-600 

System  INPUT  Buffer 

LAT 

0259-0262 

601-610 

KERNAL  Table:  Active  Log- 
ical File  No's. 

FAT 

0263-026C 

611-620 

KERNAL  Table:  Device  No. 
for  Each  File 

SAT 

026D— 0276 

621-630 

KERNAL  Table:  Second 
Address  Each  File 

KEYD 

0277-0280 

631-640 

Keyboard  Buffer  Queue 
(FIFO) 

316 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


LABEL 

HEX 

ADDRESS 

DECIMAL 

LOCATION 

DESCRIPTION 

MEMSTR 

0281-0282 

641-642 

Pointer:  Bottom  of  Memory 
for  O.S. 

MEMSIZ 

0283-0284 

643-644 

Pointer:  Top  of  Memory  for 
O.S. 

TIMOUT 

0285 

645 

Flag:  Kernal  Variable  for 
IEEE  Timeout 

COLOR 

0286 

646 

Current  Character  Color 
Code 

GDCOL 

0287 

647 

Background  Color  Under 
Cursor 

HI  BASE 

0288 

648 

Top  of  Screen  Memory 
(Page) 

XMAX 

0289 

649 

Size  of  Keyboard  Buffer 

RPTFLG 

02 8 A 

650 

Flag:  REPEAT  Key  Used, 
$80  = Repeat 

KOUNT 

028B 

651 

Repeat  Speed  Counter 

DELAY 

028C 

652 

Repeat  Delay  Counter 

SHFLAG 

028D 

653 

Flag:  Keyb'rd  SHIFT  Key/ 
CTRL  Key/C  = Key 

LSTSHF 

028E 

654 

Last  Keyboard  Shift  Pat- 
tern 

KEYLOG 

028F-0290 

655-656 

Vector:  Keyboard  Table 
Setup 

MODE 

0291 

657 

Flag:  $00  = Disable  SHIFT 
Keys,  $80  = Enable 
SHIFT  Keys 

AUTODN 

0292 

658 

Flag:  Auto  Scroll  Down,  0 
= ON 

M5 1CTR 

0293 

659 

RS-232:  6551  Control 
Register  Image 

M51CDR 

0294 

660 

RS-232:  6551  Command 
Register  Image 

M51AJB 

0295-0296 

661-662 

RS-232  Non-Standard  BPS 
(Time/2-100)  USA 

RSSTAT 

0297 

663 

RS-232:  6551  Status  Regis- 
ter Image 

BITNUM 

0298 

664 

RS-232  Number  of  Bits 

Left  to  Send 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  317 


LABEL 

HEX 

ADDRESS 

DECIMAL 

LOCATION 

DESCRIPTION 

BAUDOF 

0299-029A 

665-666 

RS-232  Baud  Rate:  Full  Bit 
Time  (/ xs ) 

RIDBE 

029B 

667 

RS-232  Index  to  End  of 
Input  Buffer 

RIDBS 

029C 

668 

RS-232  Start  of  Input  Buf- 
fer (Page) 

RODBS 

029D 

669 

RS-232  Start  of  Output 
Buffer  (Page) 

RODBE 

029E 

670 

RS-232  Index  to  End  of 
Output  Buffer 

IRQTMP 

029F-02A0 

671-672 

Holds  IRQ  Vector  During 
Tape  I/O 

ENABL 

02  A 1 

673 

RS-232  Enables 

02A2 

674 

TOD  Sense  During  Cas- 
sette I/O 

02A3 

675 

Temp  Storage  For  Cassette 
Read 

02A4 

676 

Temp  D1IRQ  Indicator  For 
Cassette  Read 

02A5 

677 

Temp  For  Line  Index 

02A6 

678 

PAL/NTSC  Flag,  0 = 

NTSC,  1=  PAL 

02A7-02FF 

679-767 

Unused 

IERROR 

0300-0301 

768-769 

Vector:  Print  BASIC  Error 
Message 

IMAIN 

0302-0303 

770-771 

Vector:  BASIC  Warm  Start 

ICRNCH 

0304-0305 

772-773 

Vector:  Tokenize  BASIC 

Text 

IQPLOP 

0306-0307 

774-775 

Vector:  BASIC  Text  LIST 

IGONE 

0308-0309 

776-777 

Vector:  BASIC  Char.  Dis- 
patch 

IEVAL 

030A-030B 

778-779 

Vector:  BASIC  Token 
Evaluation 

SAREG 

030C 

780 

Storage  for  6502  .A  Reg- 
ister 

SXREG 

030D 

781 

Storage  for  6502  .X  Regis- 
ter 

318 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


LABEL 

HEX 

ADDRESS 

DECIMAL 

LOCATION 

DESCRIPTION 

SYREG 

030E 

782 

Storage  for  6502  .Y  Regis- 
ter 

SPREG 

030F 

783 

Storage  for  6502  .SP 
Register 

USRPOK 

0310 

784 

USR  Function  Jump  Instr 
(4C) 

USRADD 

0311-0312 

785-786 

USR  Address  Low  Byte/ 
High  Byte 

0313 

787 

Unused 

CINV 

0314-0315 

788-789 

Vector:  Hardware  IRQ 
Interrupt 

CBINV 

0316-0317 

790-791 

Vector:  BRK  Instr.  Interrupt 

NMINV 

0318-0319 

792-793 

Vector:  Non-Maskable 
Interrupt 

IOPEN 

031A-031B 

794-795 

KERNAL  OPEN  Routine 

Vector 

ICLOSE 

031C-031D 

796-797 

KERNAL  CLOSE  Routine 

Vector 

ICHKIN 

031 E— 031 F 

798-799 

KERNAL  CHKIN  Routine 

Vector 

ICKOUT 

0320-0321 

800-801 

KERNAL  CHKOUT  Routine 

Vector 

ICLRCH 

0322-0323 

802-803 

KERNAL  CLRCHN  Routine 

Vector 

IBASIN 

0324-0325 

804-805 

KERNAL  CHRIN  Routine 

Vector 

IBSOUT 

0326-0327 

806-807 

KERNAL  CHROUT  Routine 

Vector 

ISTOP 

0328-0329 

808-809 

KERNAL  STOP  Routine 

Vector 

IGETIN 

032A-032B 

810-811 

KERNAL  GETIN  Routine 

Vector 

ICLALL 

032C-032D 

812-813 

KERNAL  CLALL  Routine 

Vector 

USRCMD 

032E-032F 

814-815 

User-Defined  Vector 

ILOAD 

0330-0331 

816-817 

KERNAL  LOAD  Routine 

Vector 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


319 


LABEL 

HEX 

ADDRESS 

DECIMAL 

LOCATION 

DESCRIPTION 

ISAVE 

0332-0333 

818-819 

KERNAL  SAVE  Routine  Vec- 
tor 

0334-033B 

820-827 

Unused 

TBUFFR 

033C-03FB 

828-1019 

Tape  I/O  Buffer 

03FC-03FF 

1020-1023 

Unused 

VICSCN 

0400-07FF 

1024-2047 

1024  Byte  Screen  Memory 
Area 

0400-07E7 

1024-2023 

Video  Matrix:  25  Lines  X 
40  Columns 

07F8-07FF 

2040-2047 

Sprite  Data  Pointers 

0800-9FFF 

2048-40959 

Normal  BASIC  Program 
Space 

8000- 9FFF 

32768-40959 

VSP  Cartridge  ROM — 

8192  Bytes 

A000-BFFF 

40960-49151 

BASIC  ROM— 8192  Bytes 
(or  8K  RAM) 

C000-CFFF 

49152-53247 

RAM — 4096  Bytes 

D000-DFFF 

53248-57343 

Input/Output  Devices  and 
Color  RAM 

or  Character  Generator 
ROM 

or  RAM — 4096  Bytes 

E000-FFFF 

J. 

57344-65535 

KERNAL  ROM — 8192 

Bytes  (or  8K  RAM) 

COMMODOR 

E 64  INPUT/OUTPUT  ASSIGNMENTS 

HEX 

DECIMAL 

BITS 

DESCRIPTION 

0000 

0 

7-0 

MOS  6510  Data  Direction 
Register  (xxlOl  1 1 1) 

Bit  = 1 : Output,  Bit  = 0: 
Input,  x = Don't  Care 

0001 

1 

1 

i 

0 / 

MOS  6510  Micro-Processor 
On-Chip  I/O  Port 
'LORAM  Signal  (0=Switch 
BASIC  ROM  Out) 

320  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


HEX 

DECIMAL 

BITS 

DESCRIPTION 

D000-D02E 

53248-54271 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6-7 

/HIRAM  Signal  (0  = Switch 
Kernal  ROM  Out) 
/CHAREN  Signal 

(0  = Switch  Char.  ROM 

In) 

Cassette  Data  Output  Line 
Cassette  Switch  Sense 

1 = Switch  Closed 

Cassette  Motor  Control 

0 = ON,  1 = OFF 
Undefined 

MOS  6566  VIDEO  INTER- 

D000 

53248 

FACE  CONTROLLER 
(VIC) 

Sprite  0 X Pos 

D001 

53249 

Sprite  0 Y Pos 

D002 

53250 

Sprite  1 X Pos 

D003 

53251 

Sprite  1 Y Pos 

D004 

53252 

Sprite  2 X Pos 

D005 

53253 

Sprite  2 Y Pos 

D006 

53254 

Sprite  3 X Pos 

D007 

53255 

Sprite  3 Y Pos 

D008 

53256 

Sprite  4 X Pos 

D009 

53257 

Sprite  4 Y Pos 

DOOA 

53258 

Sprite  5 X Pos 

DOOB 

53259 

Sprite  5 Y Pos 

DOOC 

53260 

Sprite  6 X Pos 

DOOD 

53261 

Sprite  6 Y Pos 

DOOE 

53262 

Sprite  7 X Pos 

DOOF 

53263 

Sprite  7 Y Pos 

DOIO 

53264 

Sprites  0-7  X Pos  (msb  of 

DOl  1 

53265 

X coord.) 

VIC  Control  Register 

7 

6 

Raster  Compare:  (Bit  8) 

See  53266 

Extended  Color  Text 

Mode:  1 = Enable 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


321 


HEX 

DECIMAL 

BITS 

DESCRIPTION 

5 

Bit-Map  Mode:  1 = En- 

able 

4 

Blank  Screen  to  Border 

Color:  0 = Blank 

3 

Select  24/25  Row  Text 

Display:  1 = 25  Rows 

2-0 

Smooth  Scroll  to  Y Dot- 

Position  (0-7) 

D01 2 

53266 

Read  Raster  / Write  Raster 

Value  for  Compare  IRQ 

D01 3 

53267 

Light-Pen  Latch  X Pos 

D014 

53268 

Light-Pen  Latch  Y Pos 

D015 

53269 

Sprite  Display  Enable: 

1 = Enable 

D01 6 

53270 

7-6 

VIC  Control  Register 

Unused 

5 

ALWAYS  SET  THIS  BIT  TO 

0! 

4 

Multi-Color  Mode:  1 = 

Enable  (Text  or  Bit- 
Map) 

3 

Select  38/40  Column  Text 

Display:  1 = 40  Cols 

2-0 

Smooth  Scroll  to  X Pos 

D01 7 

53271 

Sprites  0-7  Expand  2X 

Vertical  (Y) 

D018 

53272 

VIC  Memory  Control  Reg- 

ister 

7-4 

Video  Matrix  Base  Ad- 

dress (inside  VIC) 

3-1 

Character  Dot-Data  Base 

Address  (inside  VIC) 

DO!  9 

53273 

VIC  Interrupt  Flag  Regis- 

ter (Bit  = 1:  IRQ  Oc- 
curred) 

7 

Set  on  Any  Enabled  VIC 

IRQ  Condition 

3 

Light-Pen  Triggered  IRQ 

Flag 

322 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


HEX 

DECIMAL 

BITS 

DESCRIPTION 

2 

Sprite  to  Sprite  Collision 

IRQ  Flag 

1 

Sprite  to  Background 

Collision  IRQ  Flag 

0 

Raster  Compare  IRQ  Flag 

D01 A 

53274 

IRQ  Mask  Register:  1 = 

Interrupt  Enabled 

D01B 

53275 

Sprite  to  Background 

Display  Priority:  1 = 
Sprite 

D01C 

53276 

Sprites  0-7  Multi-Color 

Mode  Select:  1 = 

M.C.M. 

D01D 

53277 

Sprites  0—7  Expand  2X 

Horizontal  (X) 

D01E 

53278 

Sprite  to  Sprite  Collision 

Detect 

D01F 

53279 

Sprite  to  Background 

Collision  Detect 

D020 

53280 

Border  Color 

D021 

53281 

Background  Color  0 

D022 

53282 

Background  Color  1 

D023 

53283 

Background  Color  2 

D024 

53284 

Background  Color  3 

D025 

53285 

Sprite  Multi-Color  Regis- 

ter 0 

D026 

53286 

Sprite  Multi-Color  Regis- 

ter 1 

D027 

53287 

Sprite  0 Color 

D028 

53288 

Sprite  1 Color 

D029 

53289 

Sprite  2 Color 

D02A 

53290 

Sprite  3 Color 

D02B 

53291 

Sprite  4 Color 

D02C 

53292 

Sprite  5 Color 

D02D 

53293 

Sprite  6 Color 

D02E 

53294 

Sprite  7 Color 

D400-D7FF 

54272-55295 

MOS  6581  SOUND 

INTERFACE  DEVICE 

(SID) 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


323 


HEX 

DECIMAL 

BITS 

DESCRIPTION 

D400 

54272 

Voice  1:  Frequency 

Control  — Low-  Byte 

D401 

54273 

Voice  1:  Frequency 

Control  — High-Byte 

D402 

54274 

Voice  1:  Pulse  Waveform 
Width  — Low- Byte 

D403 

54275 

7-4 

3-0 

Unused 

Voice  1:  Pulse  Waveform 
Width  — High-Nybble 

D404 

54276 

7 

6 

5 

4 

3 

2 

1 

0 

Voice  1:  Control  Register 
Select  Random  Noise 
Waveform,  1 = On 
Select  Pulse  Waveform, 

1 = On 

Select  Sawtooth 

Waveform,  1 = On 
Select  Triangle  Waveform, 

1 = On 

Test  Bit:  1 = Disable  Os- 
cillator 1 

Ring  Modulate  Osc.  1 with 
Osc.  3 Output,  1 = On 
Synchronize  Osc.  1 with 
Osc.  3 Frequency,  1 = 
On 

Gate  Bit:  1 = Start  Att / 
Dec/Sus,  0 = Start  Re- 
lease 

D405 

54277 

7-4 

3-0 

Envelope  Generator  1:  At- 
tack / Decay  Cycle 
Control 

Select  Attack  Cycle  Dura- 
tion: 0—15 

Select  Decay  Cycle  Dura- 
tion: 0—15 

D406 

54278 

Envelope  Generator  1: 
Sustain  / Release  Cycle 
Control 

324 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


HEX 

DECIMAL 

BITS 

DESCRIPTION 

D407 

54279 

7-4 

3-0 

Select  Sustain  Cycle  Du- 
ration: 0—15 

Select  Release  Cycle  Du- 
ration: 0—15 

Voice  2:  Frequency 

D408 

54280 

Control  — Low-  Byte 

Voice  2:  Frequency 

D409 

54281 

Control  — High-Byte 
Voice  2:  Pulse  Waveform 

D40A 

54282 

7-4 

Width  — Low-Byte 

Unused 

D40B 

54283 

CO 

1 

o 

Voice  2:  Pulse  Waveform 
Width  — High-Nybble 
Voice  2:  Control  Register 

D40C 

54284 

7 

6 

5 

4 

3 

2 

1 

0 

Select  Random  Noise 
Waveform,  1 = On 
Select  Pulse  Waveform, 

1 = On 

Select  Sawtooth 

Waveform,  1 = On 
Select  Triangle 

Waveform,  1 = On 

Test  Bit:  1 = Disable  Os- 
cillator 2 

Ring  Modulate  Osc.  2 with 
Osc.  1 Output,  1 = On 
Synchronize  Osc.  2 with 
Osc.  1 Frequency,  1 = 
On 

Gate  Bit:  1 = Start  Att/ 
Dec/Sus,  0 = Start  Re- 
lease 

Envelope  Generator  2:  At- 

7-4 

tack  / Decay  Cycle 
Control 

Select  Attack  Cycle  Dura- 
tion: 0-15 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


325 


HEX 

DECIMAL 

BITS 

DESCRIPTION 

D40D 

54285 

o 

1 

CO 

Select  Decay  Cycle  Dura- 
tion: 0-15 

Envelope  Generator  2: 

D40E 

54286 

7-4 

3-0 

Sustain  / Release  Cycle 
Control 

Select  Sustain  Cycle  Du- 
ration: 0—15 

Select  Release  Cycle  Du- 
ration: 0—15 

Voice  3:  Frequency 

D40F 

54287 

Control  — Low-Byte 

Voice  3:  Frequency 

D410 

54288 

Control  — High-Byte 

Voice  3:  Pulse  Waveform 

D41 1 

54289 

7-4 

Width  — Low- Byte 

Unused 

D412 

54290 

GO 

1 

o 

Voice  3:  Pulse  Waveform 
Width  — High-Nybble 
Voice  3:  Control  Register 

7 

6 

5 

4 

3 

2 

1 

0 

Select  Random  Noise 
Waveform,  1 = On 

Select  Pulse  Waveform,  1 
= On 

Select  Sawtooth 

Waveform,  1 = On 

Select  Triangle  Waveform, 

1 = On 

Test  Bit:  1 = Disable  Os- 
cillator 3 

Ring  Modulate  Osc.  3 with 
Osc.  2 Output,  1 = On 

Synchronize  Osc.  3 with 

Osc.  2 Frequency,  1 = 

On 

Gate  Bit:  1 = Start  Att/ 
Dec/Sus,  0 = Start  Re- 
lease 

326  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


HEX 

DECIMAL 

BITS 

DESCRIPTION 

D413 

54291 

Envelope  Generator  3:  At- 

tack / Decay  Cycle 
Control 

7-4 

Select  Attack  Cycle  Dura- 

tion: 0—15 

3-0 

Select  Decay  Cycle  Dura- 

tion: 0—15 

D414 

54292 

Envelope  Generator  3: 

Sustain  / Release  Cycle 
Control 

7-4 

Select  Sustain  Cycle  Du- 

ration: 0—15 

3-0 

Select  Release  Cycle  Du- 

ration: 0—15 

D415 

54293 

Filter  Cutoff  Frequency: 

Low-Nybble  (Bits  2 — 0) 

D41 6 

54294 

Filter  Cutoff  Frequency: 

High- Byte 

D41 7 

54295 

Filter  Resonance  Control  / 

Voice  Input  Control 

7-4 

Select  Filter  Resonance: 

0-15 

3 

Filter  External  Input:  1 = 

Yes,  0 = No 

2 

Filter  Voice  3 Output:  1 = 

Yes,  0 = No 

1 

Filter  Voice  2 Output:  1 = 

Yes,  0 = No 

0 

Filter  Voice  1 Output:  1 = 

Yes,  0 = No 

D41 8 

54296 

Select  Filter  Mode  and 

Volume 

7 

Cut-Off  Voice  3 Output:  1 

= Off,  0 = On 

6 

Select  Filter  High-Pass 

Mode:  1 = On 

5 

Select  Filter  Band-Pass 

Mode:  1 = On 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


327 


HEX 

DECIMAL 

BITS 

DESCRIPTION 

D419 

54297 

4 

3-0 

Select  Filter  Low-Pass 

Mode:  1 = On 

Select  Output  Volume: 

0-15 

Analog/Digital  Converter: 

D41 A 

54298 

Game  Paddle  1 (0- 
255) 

Analog/Digital  Converter: 

D41B 

54299 

Game  Paddle  2 (0- 
255) 

Oscillator  3 Random 

D41C 

54230 

Number  Generator 
Envelope  Generator  3 

D500-D7FF 

54528-55295 

Output 

SID  IMAGES 

D800-DBFF 

55296-56319 

Color  RAM  (Nybbles) 

DCOO-DCFF 

56320 -56575 

MOS  6526  Complex 

DCOO 

56320 

Interface  Adapter  (CIA) 
#1 

Data  Port  A (Keyboard, 

DCOl 

56321 

7-0 

7-6 

4 

3-2 

3-0 

Joystick,  Paddles, 
Light-Pen) 

Write  Keyboard  Column 
Values  for  Keyboard 

Scan 

Read  Paddles  on  Port  A / 

B (01  = Port  A,  10  = 
Port  B) 

Joystick  A Fire  Button:  1 = 
Fire 

Paddle  Fire  Buttons 

Joystick  A Direction 
(0-15) 

Data  Port  B (Keyboard, 

Joystick,  Paddles): 

Game  Port  1 

328 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


HEX 

DECIMAL 

BITS 

DESCRIPTION 

DC02 

56322 

7-0 

7 

6 

4 

3-2 

3-0 

Read  Keyboard  Row 

Values  for  Keyboard 
Scan 

Timer  B:  Toggle/Pulse 
Output 

Timer  A:  Toggle/Pulse 
Output 

Joystick  1 Fire  Button:  1 = 
Fire 

Paddle  Fire  Buttons 

Joystick  1 Direction 

Data  Direction 

DC03 

56323 

Register — Port  A 
(56320) 

Data  Direction 

DC04 

56324 

Register — Port  B 
(56321) 

Timer  A:  Low- Byte 

DC05 

56325 

Timer  A:  High-Byte 

DC06 

56326 

Timer  B:  Low-Byte 

DC07 

56327 

Timer  B:  High-Byte 

DC08 

56328 

Time-of-Day  Clock:  1 / 1 0 

DC09 

56329 

Seconds 

Time-of-Day  Clock:  Sec- 

DCOA 

56330 

onds 

Time-of-Day  Clock:  Min- 

DCOB 

56331 

utes 

Time-of-Day  Clock:  Hours 

DCOC 

56332 

4-  AAA/PM  Flag  (Bit  7) 
Synchronous  Serial  I/O 

DCOD 

56333 

Data  Buffer 

CIA  Interrupt  Control 

7 

4 

Register  (Read  IRQs/ 
Write  Mask) 

IRQ  Flag  (1  = IRQ  Oc- 
curred) / Set-Clear  Flag 
FLAG1  IRQ  (Cassette  Read 
/ Serial  Bus  SRQ  Input) 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


329 


HEX 

DECIMAL 

BITS 

DESCRIPTION 

3 

Serial  Port  Interrupt 

2 

Time-of-Day  Clock  Alarm 

Interrupt 

1 

Timer  B Interrupt 

0 

Timer  A Interrupt 

DCOE 

56334 

7 

CIA  Control  Register  A 
Time-of-Day  Clock  Fre- 

quency: 1 = 50  Hz,  0 
= 60  Hz 

6 

Serial  Port  I/O  Mode:  1 = 

Output,  0 = Input 

5 

Timer  A Counts:  1 = CNT 

Signals,  0 = System  02 
Clock 

4 

Force  Load  Timer  A:  1 = 

Yes 

3 

Timer  A Run  Mode:  1 = 

One-Shot,  0 = Con- 
tinuous 

2 

Timer  A Output  Mode  to 

PB6:  1 = Toggle,  0 = 
Pulse 

1 

Timer  A Output  on  PB6:  1 

= Yes,  0 = No 

0 

Start/Stop  Timer  A:  1 = 

Start,  0 = Stop 

DCOF 

56335 

7 

CIA  Control  Register  B 

Set  Alarm/TOD-Clock:  1 = 

Alarm,  0 = Clock 

330  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


HEX 

DECIMAL 

BITS 

DESCRIPTION 

6-5 

4-0 

Timer  B Mode  Select: 

00  = Count  System  02 
Clock  Pulses 

01  = Count  Positive 

CNT  Transitions 

10  = Count  Timer  A 

Underflow  Pulses 

1 1 = Count  Timer  A 

Underflows  While 

CNT  Positive 

Same  as  CIA  Control  Reg. 
A— for  Timer  B 

DDOO-DDFF 

56576-56831 

MOS  6526  Complex  Inter- 
face Adapter  (CIA)  #2 

DDOO 

56576 

7 

6 

5 

4 

3 

2 

1-0 

Data  Port  A (Serial  Bus, 
RS-232,  VIC  Memory 
Control) 

Serial  Bus  Data  Input 
Serial  Bus  Clock  Pulse 

Input 

Serial  Bus  Data  Output 
Serial  Bus  Clock  Pulse 
Output 

Serial  Bus  ATN  Signal 
Output 

RS-232  Data  Output  (User 
Port) 

VIC  Chip  System  Memory 
Bank  Select  (Default  = 

ID 

DD01 

56577 

7 

Data  Port  B (User  Port, 
RS-232) 

User  / RS-232  Data  Set 
Ready 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


331 


HEX 

DECIMAL 

BITS 

DESCRIPTION 

6 

5 

4 

3 

2 

1 

0 

User  / RS-232  Clear  to 
Send 

User 

User  / RS-232  Carrier  De- 
tect 

User  / RS-232  Ring  Indi- 
cator 

User  / RS-232  Data  Termi- 
nal Ready 

User  / RS-232  Request  to 
Send 

User  / RS-232  Received 
Data 

DD02 

56578 

Data  Direction 

Register — Port  A 

DD03 

56579 

Data  Direction 

Register — Port  B 

DD04 

56580 

Timer  A:  Low-Byte 

DD05 

56581 

Timer  A:  High-Byte 

DD06 

56582 

Timer  B:  Low-Byte 

DD07 

56583 

Timer  B:  High-Byte 

DD08 

56584 

Time-of-Day  Clock:  1/10 
Seconds 

DD09 

56585 

Time-of-Day  Clock:  Sec- 
onds 

DDOA 

56586 

Time-of-Day  Clock:  Min- 
utes 

DDOB 

56587 

Time-of-Day  Clock:  Hours 
+ AAA/PM  Flag  (Bit  7) 

DDOC 

56588 

Synchronous  Serial  I/O 
Data  Buffer 

DDOD 

56589 

CIA  Interrupt  Control 
Register  (Read  NMIs/ 
Write  Mask) 

332 


BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


HEX 

DECIMAL 

BITS 

DESCRIPTION 

7 

NMI  Flag  (1  = NMI  Oc- 

curred) / Set-Clear  Flag 

4 

FLAG1  NMI  (User/RS-232 

Received  Data  Input) 

3 

Serial  Port  Interrupt 

1 

Timer  B Interrupt 

0 

Timer  A Interrupt 

DDOE 

56590 

7 

CIA  Control  Register  A 
Time-of-Day  Clock  Fre- 

quency: 1 = 50  Hz,  0 
= 60  Hz 

6 

Serial  Port  I/O  Mode:  1 = 

Output,  0 = Input 

5 

Timer  A Counts:  1 = CNT 

Signals,  0 = System  02 
Clock 

4 

Force  Load  Timer  A:  1 = 

Yes 

3 

Timer  A Run  Mode:  1 = 

One-Shot,  0 = Con- 
tinuous 

2 

Timer  A Output  Mode  to 

PB6:  1 = Toggle,  0 = 
Pulse 

1 

Timer  A Output  on  PB6:  1 

= Yes,  0 = No 

0 

Start/Stop  Timer  A:  1 = 

Start,  0 = Stop 

DDOF 

56591 

7 

CIA  Control  Register  B 

Set  Alarm/TOD-Clock:  1 = 

Alarm,  0 = Clock 

BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


333 


HEX 

DECIMAL 

BITS 

DESCRIPTION 

DEOO-DEFF 

56832-57087 

6-5 

4-0 

Timer  B Mode  Select: 

00  = Count  System  02 
Clock  Pulses 

01  = Count  Positive 

CNT  Transitions 

10  = Count  Timer  A 

Underflow  Pulses 

1 1 = Count  Timer  A 
Underflows  While 

CNT  Positive 

Same  as  CIA  Control  Reg. 
A— for  Timer  B 

Reserved  for  Future  I/O 

DFOO-DFFF 

57088-57343 

Expansion 

Reserved  for  Future  I/O 

Expansion 

334  BASIC  TO  MACHINE  LANGUAGE 


CHAPTER 


INPUT/OUTPUT 

GUIDE 


• Introduction 

• Output  to  the  TV 

• Output  to  Other  Devices 

• The  Game  Ports 

• RS-232  Interface  Description 

• The  User  Port 

• The  Serial  Bus 

• The  Expansion  Port 

• Z-80  Microprocessor  Cartridge 


335 


INTRODUCTION 


Computers  have  three  basic  abilities:  they  can  calculate,  make  deci- 
sions, and  communicate.  Calculation  is  probably  the  easiest  to  program. 
Most  of  the  rules  of  mathematics  are  familiar  to  us.  Decision  making  is 
not  too  difficult,  since  the  rules  of  logic  are  relatively  few,  even  if  you 
don't  know  them  too  well  yet. 

Communication  is  the  most  complex,  because  it  involves  the  least 
exacting  set  of  rules.  This  is  not  an  oversight  in  the  design  of  computers. 
The  rules  allow  enough  flexibility  to  communicate  virtually  anything,  and 
in  many  possible  ways.  The  only  real  rule  is  this:  whatever  sends  infor- 
mation must  present  the  information  so  that  it  can  be  understood  by  the 
receiver. 


NOTE:  The  tables  and  device  numbers  in  this  section  refer  to  Commodore's  1515 
and  1525  printers  or  the  1540  and  1541  disk  drives.  For  equivalent  information  on 
Commodore's  newest  line  of  peripherals,  like  the  1520  plotter  or  the  1526  and 
MPP-801  printers  see  the  User's  Guide  that  comes  with  that  particular  hardware. 


OUTPUT  TO  THE  TV 


The  simplest  form  of  output  in  BASIC  is  the  PRINT  statement.  PRINT 
uses  the  TV  screen  as  the  output  device,  and  your  eyes  are  the  input 
device  because  they  use  the  information  on  the  screen. 

When  PRINTing  on  the  screen,  your  main  objective  is  to  format  the 
information  on  the  screen  so  it's  easy  to  read.  You  should  try  to  think  like 
a graphic  artist,  using  colors,  placement  of  letters,  capital  and  lower 
case  letters,  as  well  as  graphics  to  best  communicate  the  information. 
Remember,  no  matter  how  smart  your  program,  you  want  to  be  able  to 
understand  what  the  results  mean  to  you. 

The  PRINT  statement  uses  certain  character  codes  as  "commands"  to 
the  cursor.  The  key  doesn't  actually  display  anything,  it  just 

makes  the  cursor  change  position.  Other  commands  change  colors, 
clear  the  screen,  and  insert  or  delete  spaces.  The  E&ZE9  key  has  a 
character  code  number  (CHR$)  of  13.  A complete  table  of  these  codes  is 
contained  in  Appendix  C. 

There  are  two  functions  in  the  BASIC  language  that  work  with  the 
PRINT  statement.  TAB  positions  the  cursor  on  the  given  position  from  the 
left  edge  of  the  screen,  SPC  moves  the  cursor  right  a given  number  of 
spaces  from  the  current  position. 


336  INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


Punctuation  marks  in  the  PRINT  statement  serve  to  separate  and  for- 
mat information.  The  semicolon  (;)  separates  2 items  without  any  spaces 
in  between.  If  it  is  the  last  thing  on  a line,  the  cursor  remains  after  the 
last  thing  PRINTed  instead  of  going  down  to  the  next  line.  It  suppresses 
(replaces)  the  RETURN  character  that  is  normally  PRINTed  at  the  end  of 
the  line. 

The  comma  (,)  separates  items  into  columns.  The  Commodore  64  has 
4 columns  of  10  characters  each  on  the  screen.  When  the  computer 
PRINTs  a comma,  it  moves  the  cursor  right  to  the  start  of  the  next  col- 
umn. If  it  is  past  the  last  column  of  the  line,  it  moves  the  cursor  down  to 
the  next  line.  Like  the  semicolon,  if  it  is  the  last  item  on  a line  the 
RETURN  is  suppressed. 

The  quote  marks  ("  ")  separate  literal  text  from  variables.  The  first 
quote  mark  on  the  line  starts  the  literal  area,  and  the  next  quote  mark 
ends  it.  By  the  way,  you  don't  have  to  have  a final  quote  mark  at  the 
end  of  the  line. 

The  RETURN  code  (CHR$  code  of  13)  makes  the  cursor  .go  to  the  next 
logical  line  on  the  screen.  This  is  not  always  the  very  next  line.  When 
you  type  past  the  end  of  a line,  that  line  is  linked  to  the  next  line.  The 
computer  knows  that  both  lines  are  really  one  long  line.  The  links  are 
held  in  the  line  link  table  (see  the  memory  map  for  how  this  is  set  up). 

A logical  line  can  be  1 or  2 screen  lines  long,  depending  on  what  was 
typed  or  PRINTed.  The  logical  line  the  cursor  is  on  determines  where 
the  BBEB  key  sends  it.  The  logical  line  at  the  top  of  the  screen 
determines  if  the  screen  scrolls  1 or  2 lines  at  a time. 

There  are  other  ways  to  use  the  TV  as  an  output  device.  The  chapter 
on  graphics  describes  the  commands  to  create  objects  that  move  across 
the  screen.  The  VIC  chip  section  tells  how  the  screen  and  border  colors 
and  sizes  are  changed.  And  the  sound  chapter  tells  how  the  TV  speaker 
creates  music  and  special  effects. 


OUTPUT  TO  OTHER  DEVICES 


It  is  often  necessary  to  send  output  to  devices  other  than  the  screen, 
like  a cassette  deck,  printer,  disk  drive,  or  modem.  The  OPEN  statement 
in  BASIC  creates  a "channel"  to  talk  to  one  of  these  devices.  Once  the 
channel  is  OPEN,  the  PRINT#  statement  will  send  characters  to  that 
device. 


INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE  337 


EXAMPLE  of  OPEN  and  PRINT#  Statements: 

100  OPEN  4,  4:  PRINT#  4,  "WRITING  ON  PRINTER" 

110  OPEN  3,  8,  3,  "0:DISK-FILE,S,W":  PRINT#  3,  "SEND  TO  DISK" 
120  OPEN  1,  1,  1,  "TAPE-FILE":  PRINT#  1,  "WRITE  ON  TAPE" 

130  OPEN  2,  2,  0,  CHR$(10):  PRINT#  2,  "SEND  TO  MODEM" 

The  OPEN  statement  is  somewhat  different  for  each  device.  The  pa- 
rameters in  the  OPEN  statement  are  shown  in  the  table  below  for  each 
device. 

TABLE  of  OPEN  Statement  Parameters: 

FORMAT:  OPEN  file#,  device#,  number,  string 


DEVICE 

DEVICE# 

NUMBER 

STRING 

CASSETTE 

1 

0 = Input 

File  Name 

MODEM 

2 

1 = Output 

2 = Output  with 

EOT 

0 

Control  Registers 

SCREEN 

PRINTER 

3 

4 or  5 

0,1 

0 = Upper/Graphics 

Text  Is  PRINTed 

DISK 

8 to  11 

7 = Upper/Lower  Case 

0 = Program  File 

Drive  #:  Program 

LOAD 

1 = Program  File 

SAVE 

2-14  = Data  Channel 

15  = Command 

Channel 

File  Name 

Drive  #:  Program 

File  Name 

Drive  #,  File  Name, 
File  Type,  Read/Write 
Command 

OUTPUT  TO  PRINTER 


The  printer  is  an  output  device  similar  to  the  screen.  Your  main  con- 
cern when  sending  output  to  the  printer  is  to  create  a format  that  is  easy 
on  the  eyes.  Your  tools  here  include  reversed,  double-width,  capital  and 
lower  case  letters,  as  well  as  dot-programmable  graphics. 

The  SPC  function  works  for  the  printer  in  the  same  way  it  works  for  the 
screen.  However,  the  TAB  function  does  not  work  correctly  on  the  print- 


338  INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


er,  because  it  calculates  the  current  position  on  the  line  based  on  the 
cursor's  position  on  the  screen,  not  on  the  paper. 

The  OPEN  statement  for  the  printer  creates  the  channel  for  communi- 
cation. It  also  specifies  which  character  set  will  be  used,  either  upper 
case  with  graphics  or  upper  and  lower  case. 

EXAMPLES  of  OPEN  Statement  for  Printer: 

OPEN  1,  4:  REM  UPPER  CASE/GRAPHICS 
OPEN  1,4 ,7:  REM  UPPER  AND  LOWER  CASE 

When  working  with  one  character  set,  individual  lines  can  be  PRINTed 
in  the  opposite  character  set.  When  in  upper  case  with  graphics,  the 
cursor  down  character  (CHR$(17))  switches  the  characters  to  the  upper 
and  lower  case  set.  When  in  upper  and  lower  case,  the  cursor  up  char- 
acter (CHR$(145))  allows  upper  case  and  graphics  characters  to  be 
PRINTed. 

Other  special  functions  in  the  printer  are  controlled  through  character 
codes.  All  these  codes  are  simply  PRINTed  just  like  any  other  character. 

TABLE  of  Printer  Control  Character  Codes: 


CHR$  CODE 

PURPOSE 

10 

Line  feed 

13 

RETURN  (automatic  line  feed  on  CBM  printers) 

14 

Begin  double-width  character  mode 

15 

End  double-width  character  mode 

18 

Begin  reverse  character  mode 

146 

End  reverse  character  mode 

17 

Switch  to  upper/lower  case  character  set 

145 

Switch  to  upper  case/graphics  character  set 

16 

Tab  to  position  in  next  2 characters 

27 

Move  to  specified  dot  position 

8 

Begin  dot-programmable  graphic  mode 

26 

Repeat  graphics  data 

See  your  Commodore  printer's  manual  for  details  on  using  the  com- 
mand codes. 

OUTPUT  TO  MODEM 

The  modem  is  a simple  device  that  can  translate  character  codes  into 
audio  pulses  and  vice-versa,  so  that  computers  can  communicate  over 

INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE  339 


T 


telephone  lines.  The  OPEN  statement  for  the  modem  sets  up  the  pa- 
rameters to  match  the  speed  and  format  of  the  other  computer  you  are 
communicating  with.  Two  characters  can  be  sent  in  the  string  at  the  end 
of  the  OPEN  statement. 

The  bit  positions  of  the  first  character  code  determine  the  baud  rate, 
number  of  data  bits,  and  number  of  stop  bits.  The  second  code  is  op- 
tional, and  its  bits  specify  the  parity  and  duplex  of  the  transmission.  See 
the  RS-232  section  or  your  VICMODEM  manual  for  specific  details  on  this 
device. 

EXAMPLE  of  OPEN  Statement  for  Modem: 

OPEN  1,  2,  0,  CHR$(6):  REM  300  BAUD 

100  OPEN  2,  2,  0,  CHR$(163)  CHR$(1 12):  REM  110  BAUD,  ETC. 

Most  computers  use  the  American  Standard  Code  for  Information  In- 
terchange, known  as  ASCII  (pronounced  ASK-KEY).  This  standard  set  of 
character  codes  is  somewhat  different  from  the  codes  used  in  the  Com- 
modore 64.  When  communicating  with  other  computers,  the  Commo- 
dore character  codes  must  be  translated  into  their  ASCII  counterparts.  A 
table  of  standard  ASCII  codes  is  included  in  this  book  in  Appendix  C. 

Output  to  the  modem  is  a fairly  uncomplicated  task,  aside  from  the 
need  for  character  translation.  However,  you  must  know  the  receiving 
device  fairly  well,  especially  when  writing  programs  where  your 
computer  "talks"  to  another  computer  without  human  intervention.  An 
example  of  this  would  be  a terminal  program  that  automatically  types  in 
your  account  number  and  secret  password.  To  do  this  successfully,  you 
must  carefully  count  the  number  of  characters  and  RETURN  characters. 
Otherwise,  the  computer  receiving  the  characters  won't  know  what  to  do 
with  them. 

WORKING  WITH  CASSETTE  TAPE 

Cassette  tapes  have  an  almost  unlimited  capacity  for  data.  The 
longer  the  tape,  the  more  information  it  can  store.  However,  tapes  are 
limited  in  time.  The  more  data  on  the  tape,  the  longer  the  time  it  takes 
to  find  the  information. 

The  programmer  must  try  to  minimize  the  time  factor  when  working 
with  tape  storage.  One  common  practice  is  to  read  the  entire  cassette 
data  file  into  RAM,  then  process  it,  and  then  re-write  all  the  data  on  the 
tape.  This  allows  you  to  sort,  edit,  and  examine  your  data.  However, 
this  limits  the  size  of  your  files  to  the  amount  of  available  RAM. 


340  INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


If  your  data  file  is  larger  than  the  available  RAM,  it  is  probably  time 
to  switch  to  using  the  floppy  disk.  The  disk  can  read  data  at  any  position 
on  the  disk,  without  needing  to  read  through  all  the  other  data.  You  can 
write  data  over  old  data  without  disturbing  the  rest  of  the  file.  That's 
why  the  disk  is  used  for  all  business  applications  like  ledgers  and  mail- 
ing lists. 

The  PRINT#  statement  formats  data  just  like  the  PRINT  statement 
does.  All  punctuation  works  the  same.  But  remember,  you're  not  work- 
ing with  the  screen  now.  The  formatting  must  be  done  with  the  INPUT# 
statement  constantly  in  mind. 

Consider  the  statement  PRINT#  1,  A$,  B$,  C$.  When  used  with  the 
screen,  the  commas  between  the  variables  provide  enough  blank  space 
between  items  to  format  them  into  columns  ten  characters  wide.  On 
cassette,  anywhere  from  1 to  10  spaces  will  be  added,  depending  on 
the  length  of  the  strings.  This  wastes  space  on  your  tape. 

Even  worse  is  what  happens  when  the  INPUT#  statement  tries  to  read 
these  strings.  The  statement  INPUT#  1,  A$,  B$,  C$  will  discover  no  data 
for  B$  and  C$.  A$  will  contain  all  three  variables,  plus  the  spaces  be- 
tween them.  What  happens?  Here's  a look  at  the  tape  file: 

A$="DOG"  B$="CAT"  C$="TREE" 

PRINT#  1,  A$,  B$,  C$ 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  11  1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 19  20  21  22  23  24  25 
DOG  CAT  TREE  RETURN 


The  INPUT#  statement  works  like  the  regular  INPUT  statement.  When 
typing  data  into  the  INPUT  statement,  the  data  items  are  separated, 
either  by  hitting  the  key  or  using  commas  to  separate  them. 

The  PRINT#  statement  puts  a RETURN  at  the  end  of  a line  just  like  the 
PRINT  statement.  A$  fills  up  with  all  three  values  because  there's  no 
separator  on  the  tape  between  them,  only  after  all  three. 

A proper  separator  would  be  a comma  (,)  or  a RETURN  on  the  tape. 
The  RETURN  code  is  automatically  put  at  the  end  of  a PRINT  or  PRINT  # 
statement.  One  way  to  put  the  RETURN  code  between  each  item  is  to 
use  only  one  item  per  PRINT#  statement.  A better  way  is  to  set  a vari- 
able to  the  RETURN  CHR$  code,  which  is  CHR$(13),  or  use  a comma. 
The  statement  for  this  is  R$=  : PRINT#  1 , A$  R$  B$  R$  C$.  Don't  use 

commas  or  any  other  punctuation  between  the  variable  names,  since 
the  Commodore  64  can  tell  them  apart  and  they'll  only  use  up  space  in 
your  program. 


INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE  341 


A proper  tape  file  looks  like  this: 


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  11  12  13 
DOG,  CAT  , T R E E RETURN 

The  GET#  statement  will  pick  data  from  the  tape  one  character  at  a 
time.  It  will  receive  each  character,  including  the  RETURN  code  and 
other  punctuation.  The  CHR$(0)  code  is  received  as  an  empty  string,  not 
as  a one  character  string  with  a code  of  0.  If  you  try  to  use  the  ASC 
function  on  an  empty  string,  you  get  the  error  message  ILLEGAL 
QUANTITY  ERROR. 

The  line  GET#  1,  A$:  A=  ASC(A$)  is  commonly  used  in  programs  to 
examine  tape  data.  To  avoid  error  messages,  the  line  should  be  mod- 
ified to  GET#1,  A$:  A=  ASC(  A$+  CHR$(0)).  The  CHR$(0)  at  the  end 
acts  as  insurance  against  empty  strings,  but  doesn't  affect  the  ASC 
function  when  there  are  other  characters  in  A$. 

DATA  STORAGE  ON  FLOPPY  DISKETTES 

Diskettes  allow  3 different  forms  of  data  storage.  Sequential  files  are 
similar  to  those  on  tape,  but  several  can  can  be  used  at  the  same  time. 
Relative  files  let  you  organize  the  data  into  records,  and  then  read  and 
replace  individual  records  within  the  file.  Random  files  let  you  work  with 
data  anywhere  on  the  disk.  They  are  organized  into  256  byte  sections 
called  blocks. 

The  PRINT#  statement's  limitations  are  discussed  in  the  section  on 
cassette  tape.  The  same  limitations  to  format  apply  on  the  disk. 
RETURNS  or  commas  are  needed  to  separate  your  data.  The  CHR$(0)  is 
still  read  by  the  GET#  statement  as  an  empty  string. 

Relative  and  random  files  both  make  use  of  separate  data  and  com- 
mand "channels."  Data  written  to  the  disk  goes  through  the  data  chan- 
nel, where  it  is  stored  in  a temporary  buffer  in  the  disk's  RAM.  When  the 
record  or  block  is  complete,  a command  is  sent  through  the  command 
channel  that  tells  the  drive  where  to  put  the  data,  and  the  entire  buffer 
is  written. 

Applications  that  require  large  amounts  of  data  to  be  processed  are 
best  stored  in  relative  disk  files.  These  will  use  the  least  amount  of  time 
and  provide  the  best  flexibility  for  the  programmer.  Your  disk  drive 
manual  gives  a complete  programming  guide  to  use  of  disk  files. 


342  INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


THE  GAME  PORTS 


The  Commodore  64  has  two  9-pin  Game  Ports  which  allow  the  use  of 
joysticks,  paddles,  or  a light  pen.  Each  port  will  accept  either  one  joy- 
stick or  one  paddle  pair.  A light  pen  can  be  plugged  into  Port  A (only)  for 
special  graphic  control,  etc.  This  section  gives  you  examples  of  how  to  use 
the  joysticks  and  paddles  from  both  BASIC  and  machine  language. 

The  digital  joystick  is  connected  to  CIA  #1  (MOS  6526  Complex  Inter- 
face Adapter).  This  input/output  device  also  handles  the  paddle  fire  but- 
tons and  keyboard  scanning.  The  6526  CIA  chip  has  16  registers  which 
are  in  memory  locations  56320  through  56335  inclusive  ($DC00  to 
$DC0F).  Port  2 data  appears  at  location  56320  (DC00)  and  Port  1 data  is 
found  at  location  56321  ($DC01). 

A digital  joystick  has  five  distinct  switches,  four  of  the  switches  are 
used  for  direction  and  one  of  the  switches  is  used  for  the  fire  button.  The 
joystick  switches  are  arranged  as  shown: 


FIRE 

(Switch  4) 


LEFT 

(Switch  2) 


(Top) 


UP 

(Switch  0) 


DOWN 

(Switch  1) 


RIGHT 

(Switch  3) 


These  switches  correspond  to  the  lower  5 bits  of  the  data  in  location 
56320  or  56321.  Normally  the  bit  is  set  to  a one  if  a direction  is  NOT 
chosen  or  the  fire  button  is  NOT  pressed.  When  the  fire  button  is 


INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE  343 


I 


in 


pressed,  the  bit  (bit  4 in  this  case)  changes  to  a 0.  To  read  the  joystick 
from  BASIC,  the  following  subroutine  should  be  used: 


I®  FQRK=8T018 : REM  SET  UP  DIRECTION  STRING 

20  READERS <IO  : NEXT 

30  DATA " " , " N " , " S W " , " NW " 

40  DATA"SW"-,  " ",  "E",  "NE",  "SE" 

50  PR I NT "GOING. . . 

60  GOSUE100 : REM  READ  THE  JOYSTICK 

65  I FDRS < JV > = " " THENS0 : REM  CHECK  IF  A DIRECTION  WAS 
CHOSEN 

70  PRINTDRSC  JV>  1 " " : REM  OUTPUT  WHICH  DIRECTION 
80  I FFR= 1 6THEN60 : REM  CHECK  IF  FIRE  BUTTON  WAS 
PUSHED 

90  PRINT"  F 1 R E ! ! I " : GOTO60 

1W0  J V=PEEK< 56320 >: REN  GET  JOYSTICK  VALUE 
110  FR=JVAND16 : REN  FORN  FIRE  BUTTON  STATUS 
120  J V=  1 5- < .TV AND  1 5 : REN  FORN  DIRECTION  VALUE 
130  RETURN 


NOTE:  For  the  second  joystick,  set  JV  = 

PEEK  (56321). 

The  values  for  JV  correspond  to  these  directions: 

JV  EQUAL  TO 

DIRECTION 

0 

NONE 

1 

UP 

2 

DOWN 

3 



4 

LEFT 

5 

UP  & LEFT 

6 

DOWN  & LEFT 

7 



8 

RIGHT 

9 

UP  & RIGHT 

10 

DOWN  & RIGHT 

344  INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


A small  machine  code  routine  which  accomplishes  the  same  task  is  as 
follows: 

1000  ..  PAGE  {JOYSTICK. 8/5 > JOYSTICK  - BUTTON  READ 
ROUTINE 

1010  ; 

1020  ; AUTHOR  - BILL  HINBORFF 
1030  ; 

1040  DX=$C11© 

1050  DY=$C111 
1 060  *»$C200 

1070  DJRR  LDR  $DC00  ; <GET  INPUT  FROM  PORT 

FI  ONLY) 

1080  DJRRB  LDY  #0  JTHIS  ROUTINE  RERBS  ANB 

BECOBES  THE 

1 090  LDX  #0  JOVST I CK/F I REBUTTON 

INPUT  BRTfl  IN 

1100  LSR  A ; THE  ACCUMULATOR.  THIS 

LEAST  SIGNIFICANT 

1110  BCS  BJR0  J5  BITS  CONTAIN  THE 

SWITCH  CLOSURE 

1120  BEY  ; INFORMATION.  IF  A SWITCH 

IS  CLOSED  THEN  IT 

1130  BJR©  LSR  A PRODUCES  A ZERO  BIT.  IF 

A SWITCH  IS  OPEN  THEN 

1140  BCS  DJR1  ; IT  PRODUCES  A ONE  BIT. 

THE  JOYSTICK  DIR- 

1150  I NY  JECTIONS  ARE  RIGHT,  LEFT, 

FORWARD,  BACKWARD 

1160  DJR1  LSR  A ;BIT3«RIGHT,  BIT2=LEFT, 

B I T 1 ==  BACK  WARD  , 

117©  BCS  DJR2  BIT0=FORWARD  AND 

B I T 4=F I RE  BUTTON. 

1180  DEX  ; AT  RTS  TIME  DX  AND  BY 

CONTAIN  2 ■' S COMPLIMENT 

1190  DJR2  LSR  A J DIRECTION  NUMBERS  I.E. 

$FF=-1,  $00=0,  $01  = 1 . 

120©  BCS  DJR3  ;DX=1  (MOVE  RIGHT),  DX=-1 

< MOVE  LEFT), 

1210  I NX  BX=8  < NO  X CHANGE). 

D Y=- 1 < MOVE  UP  SCREEN), 

122©  DJR3  LSR  A ;DY=1  < MOVE  DOWN  SCREEN), 

DV=0  WO  V CHANGE). 

1230  STX  DX  ; THE  FORWARD  JOYSTICK 

POS I T I ON  CORRESPONDS 

1240  STY  BY  ; TO  MOVE  UP  THE  SCREEN 

AND  THE  BACKWARD 

1250  RTS  ; POSITION  TO  MOVE  DOWN 

SCREEN. 

126©  ; 

127©  ;AT  RTS  TIME  THE  CARRY  FLAG  CONTAINS  THE  FIRE 
BUTTON  STATE. 

1280  JIF  C=1  THEN  BUTTON  NOT  PRESSED.  IF  C=0  THEN 
PRESSED. 

1290 

1300  .END 


INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE  345 


PADDLES 


A paddle  is  connected  to  both  CIA  #1  and  the  SID  chip  (M OS  6581 
Sound  Interface  Device)  through  a game  port.  The  paddle  value  is  read 
via  the  SID  registers  54297  ($D419)  and  54298  ($D41A).  PADDLES  ARE 
NOT  RELIABLE  WHEN  READ  FROM  BASIC  ALONE!!!!  The  best  way  to  use 
paddles,  from  BASIC  or  machine  code,  is  to  use  the  following  machine 
language  routine.  . . . (SYS  to  it  from  BASIC  then  PEEK  the  memory 
locations  used  by  the  subroutine). 

1 000 

1010  ; if:  FOUR  PADDLE  READ  ROUTINE  <CAN  ALSO  BE  USED 
FOR  TWO > 

1020 

1030  AUTHOR  - BILL  HINDORFF 

1040  PORTA =$11000 

1050  CiriDRA=$DC02 

1060  3IH=$B400 

1070  #=$0100 

1080  BUFFER  *=*+1 

1090  pul:*:  #=*+2 

1100  PDLV  #=1+5+2 
1110  BTNfl  #=#+1 
1120  BTHB  *=i+i+l 
1130  *=$0000 
1140  PBLRD 


1150 

LDX 

#1 

/.FOR  FOUR  PADDLES 

OR  TWO 

ANALOG  JOYSTICKS 

1160  PDLRD0 

ENTRY  POINT  FOR 

ONE  PAIR  < CONDITION  X 1ST) 

1170 

SEI 

1180 

OF  DDR 

LDA 

01 DDR A 

GET  CURRENT  VALUE 

1190 

STA 

BUFFER 

SAVE  IT  AWAY 

1200 

LDA 

#$00 

1210 

INPUT- 

STA 

01 DDR A 

.;SET  PORT  A FOR 

1220 

LDA 

© 

CO 

¥r 

1230  F'DLRDl 

1240 

PADDLES 

STA 

PORTA 

; ADDRESS  A PAIR  OF 

1250 

LDV 

#$80 

;WAIT  A WHILE 

1260  PDLRD2 

1270 

NOP 

1280 

DEV 

1290 

BPL 

PDLRD2 

1300 

LDA 

SID+25 

; GET  X VALUE 

1310 

STA 

PDLX, X 

1 32© 

LDA 

SID+26 

; GET  Y VALUE 

1330 

STA 

F'DLV.*  X 

346 


INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


1340  LHFI  PORTFl 

PADDLE  FIRE  BUTTONS 

1350  ORFI  #$80 

AS  OTHER  PAIR 
1360  STfl  BTNA 
BIT  3 IS  PDL  V 
1370  LBfl  #$40 

1380  HEX 

1390  BPL  PDLRD1 

1400  LBfl  BUFFER 

1418  STfl  Cl DDR A 

VALUE  OF  DDR 
1428  LDfl  PORTfl+1 

1430  STfl  BTNB 

BIT  3 IS  PDL  V 
1440  CL I 

1450  RTS 

1460  -END 


The  paddles  can  be  read  by 


/ T I ME  TO  READ 
/.MAKE  IT  THE  SAME 
/•BIT  2 IS  PDL  X, 

/ ALL  PAIRS  DONE? 

no 

/ RESTORE  PREVIOUS 

/FOR  2ND  PAIR  - 
/BIT  2 IS  PDL  X, 


the  following  BASIC  program: 


10  C« 12*4096: REM  SET  PADDLE  ROUTINE  START 

11  REN  POKE  IN  THE  PADDLE  READING  ROUTINE 


1 5 FOR I ~0TO63 : RE ADA  = POKEC+ 1 , fl : NEXT 
20  SVSC : REM  CALL  THE  PADDLE  ROUTINE 


30  P 1 -PEEK < C+257  > 
40  P2*PEEK<C+258> 
58  F'S^PEEK  < C+259  > 
60  P4-PEEK  <.  C+260  > 


REM  SET  PADDLE  ONE  VALUE 


REM  " 

n 

TWO 

REM  " 

H 

THREE  " 

REM  " 

ii 

FOUR  n 

61  REM  READ  FIRE  BUTTON  STATUS 

62  S 1 -PEEK < C+26 1 > : S2«PEEK < C+262 > 

70  PR  I NTP 1 , F'2  .■  F'3  , P4  : REM  PRINT  PADDLE  VALUES 
72  REM  PRINT  FIRE  BUTTON  STATUS 
75  PR I NT : PR I NT " F I RE  A ” / SI, "FI RE  B " / S2 
80  FORW= 1 TO50 : NEXT : REM  WAIT  fl  WHILE 


90  PRINT'Tl" : PRINT : GOTO  20 : REM  CLEAR  SCREEN  AND  DO 


AGAIN 

95  REM  DATA  FOR  MACHINE  CODE  ROUTINE 

100  DATA 162, 1, 120, 173,2,220, 141,0, 193, 169,192, 141, 

2,220, 169 


1 1 0 DATA 1 28 ,141, 0 , 220 , 1 60 , 1 28 , 234 , 1 36 , 1 6 , 252 , 1 73 , 
25,212, 157 


1 20  DATA 1 , 1 93 , 1 73 , 26 ,212,1 57 , 3 , 1 93 , 1 73 , 0 , 220 ,9,128, 
141,5, 193 

1 30  DATA 1 69 , 64 , 202 , 1 6 , 222 , 1 73 ,0,1 93 ,141 , 2 , 220 , 1 73 , 
1,220, 141 

1 40  D AT A6 , 1 93 , 88 , 96 


INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE  347 


LIGHT  PEN 


The  light  pen  input  latches  the  current  screen  position  into  a pair  of 
registers  (LPX,  LPY)  on  a low-going  edge.  The  X position  register  19 
($13)  will  contain  the  8 MSB  of  the  X position  at  the  time  of  transition. 
Since  the  X position  is  defined  by  a 512-state  counter  (9  bits),  resolution 
to  2 horizontal  dots  is  provided.  Similarly,  the  Y position  is  latched  in  its 
register  20  ($14),  but  here  8 bits  provide  single  raster  resolution  within 
the  visible  display.  The  light  pen  latch  may  be  triggered  only  once  per 
frame,  and  subsequent  triggers  within  the  same  frame  will  have  no 
effect.  Therefore,  you  must  take  several  samples  before  turning  the  pen 
to  the  screen  (3  or  more  samples  average),  depending  upon  the  char- 
acteristics of  your  light  pen. 


RS-232  INTERFACE  DESCRIPTION 

GENERAL  OUTLINE 


The  Commodore  64  has  a built-in  RS-232  interface  for  connection  to 
any  RS-232  modem,  printer,  or  other  device.  To  connect  a device  to  the 
Commodore  64,  all  you  need  is  a cable  and  a little  bit  of  programming. 

RS-232  on  the  Commodore  64  is  set-up  in  the  standard  RS-232  for- 
mat, but  the  voltages  are  TTL  levels  (0  to  5V)  rather  than  the  normal 
RS-232  -12  to  12  volt  range.  The  cable  between  the  Commodore  64 
and  the  RS-232  device  should  take  care  of  the  necessary  voltage  con- 
versions. The  Commodore  RS-232  interface  cartridge  handles  this  prop- 
erly. 

The  RS-232  interface  software  can  be  accessed  from  BASIC  or  from 
the  KERNAL  for  machine  language  programming. 

RS-232  on  the  BASIC  level  uses  the  normal  BASIC  commands-  OPEN 
CLOSE,  CMD,  INPUT#,  GET#,  PRINT#,  and  the  reserved  variable  ST. 
INPUT#  and  GET#  fetch  data  from  the  receiving  buffer,  while  PRINT# 
and  CMD  place  data  into  the  transmitting  buffer.  The  use  of  these  com- 
mands (and  examples)  will  be  described  in  more  detail  later  in  this 
chapter. 

The  RS-232  KERNAL  byte  and  bit  level  handlers  run  under  the  control 
of  the  6526  CIA  #2  device  timers  and  interrupts.  The  6526  chip  gener- 


348  INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


ates  NMI  (Non-Maskable  Interrupt)  requests  for  RS-232  processing.  This 
allows  background  RS-232  processing  to  take  place  during  BASIC  and 
machine  language  programs.  There  are  built-in  hold-offs  in  the  KERNAL, 
cassette,  and  serial  bus  routines  to  prevent  the  disruption  of  data  stor- 
age or  transmission  by  the  NMIs  that  are  generated  by  the  RS-232 
routines.  During  cassette  or  serial  bus  activities,  data  can  NOT  be  re- 
ceived from  RS-232  devices.  But  because  these  hold-offs  are  only  local 
(assuming  you're  careful  about  your  programming)  no  interference 
should  result. 

There  are  two  buffers  in  the  Commodore  64  RS-232  interface  to  help 
prevent  the  loss  of  data  when  transmitting  or  receiving  RS-232  informa- 
tion. 

The  Commodore  64  RS-232  KERNAL  buffers  consist  of  two  first-in/ 
flrst-out  (FIFO)  buffers,  each  256  bytes  long,  at  the  top  of  memory.  The 
OPENing  of  an  RS-232  channel  automatically  allocates  512  bytes  of 
memory  for  these  buffers.  If  there  is  not  enough  free  space  beyond  the 
end  of  your  BASIC  program  no  error  message  will  be  printed,  and  the 
end  of  your  program  will  be  destroyed.  SO  BE  CAREFUL! 

These  buffers  are  automatically  removed  by  using  the  CLOSE  com- 
mand. 

OPENING  AN  RS-232  CHANNEL 

Only  one  RS-232  channel  should  be  open  at  any  time;  a second  OPEN 
statement  will  cause  the  buffer  pointers  to  be  reset.  Any  characters  in 
either  the  transmit  buffer  or  the  receive  buffer  will  be  lost. 

Up  to  4 characters  can  be  sent  in  the  filename  field.  The  first  two  are 
the  control  and  command  register  characters;  the  other  two  are  re- 
served for  future  system  options.  Baud  rate,  parity,  and  other  options 
can  be  selected  through  this  feature. 

No  error-checking  is  done  on  the  control  word  to  detect  a non- 
implemented  baud  rate.  Any  illegal  control  word  will  cause  the  system 
output  to  operate  at  a very  slow  rate  (below  50  baud). 

BASIC  SYNTAX: 

OPEN  lfn,2,0//<control  registerXcommand  registerXopt  baud 
lowXopt  baud  high>" 

Ifn-  The  logical  file  number  (Ifn)  then  can  be  any  number  from  1 
through  255.  But  be  aware  of  the  fact  that  if  you  choose  a logical  file 
number  that  is  greater  than  127,  then  a line  feed  will  follow  all  carriage 
returns. 


INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE  349 


i 


r 


128  64  32  16 


8 4 2 0 


0 

§ 

0 

10 

BAUD  RATE 

0 

0 

0 

0 

USER  RATE 

0 

0 

0 

1 

50  BAUD 

0 

0 

1 

0 

75 

0 

0 

1 

1 

110 

0 

1 

0 

0 

134.5 

0 

1 

0 

1 

150 

0 

1 

1 

0 

300 

0 

1 

1 

1 

600 

1 

0 

0 

0 

1200 

1 

0 

0 

1 

1800  [Nl] 

1 

0 

1 

0 

2400  [Nl] 

1 

0 

1 

1 

3600  [Nl] 

1 

1 

0 

0 

4800  [Nl] 

1 

1 

0 

1 

7200  [Nl] 

1 

1 

1 

0 

9600  [Nl] 

1 

1 

1 

1 

19200  [Nl] 

Figure  6-1.  Control  Register  Map. 


< control  register> — |s  a single  byte  character  (see  Figure  6-1,  Con- 
trol Register  Map)  required  to  specify  the  baud  rates.  If  the  lower  4 bits 
of  the  baud  rate  is  equal  to  zero  (0),  the  Copt  baud  lowXopt  baud 
high>  characters  give  you  a rate  based  on  the  following: 

Copt  baud  low>  = C system  f requency/rate/2- 1 00- Copt  baud 
high>*256 

Copt  baud  high>  = INT((system  frequency/rate/2- 100)/256 


350  INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


PARITY  OPTIONS  ■ 


BIT 

7 

BIT 

6 

BIT 

5 

OPERATIONS 

- 

- 

0 

PARITY  DISABLED,  NONE 
GENERATED/RECEIVED 

0 

0 

1 

ODD  PARITY 

RECEIVER/TRANSMITTER 

0 

1 

1 

EVEN  PARITY 
RECEIVER/TRANSMITTER 

1 

0 

1 

MARK  TRANSMITTED 
PARITY  CHECK  DISABLED 

1 

1 

1 

SPACE  TRANSMITTED 
PARITY  CHECK  DISABLED 

DUPLEX- 


0- FULL  DUPLEX 

1- HALF  DUPLEX 

UNUSED 
UNUSED ■ 


UNUSED 


L-HANDSHAKE 

0- 3  LINE 

1- X  LINE 


Figure  6-2.  Command  Register  Map. 


The  formulas  above  are  based  on  the  fact  that: 


system  frequency  = 1.02273E6  NTSC  (North  American  TV  stan- 
dard) 

= 0.98525E6  PAL  (U.K.  and  most  European  TV 
standard) 

<command  register> — Is  a single  byte  character  (see  Figure  6-2, 
Command  Register  Map;  that  defines  other  terminal  parameters.  This 
character  is  NOT  required. 


INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE  351 


KERNAL  ENTRY: 


OPEN  ($FFC0)  (See  KERNAL  specifications  for  more  information  on 
entry  conditions  and  instructions.) 


IMPORTANT  NOTE:  In  a BASIC  program,  the  RS-232  OPEN  command  should  be  per- 
formed before  creating  any  variables  or  arrays  because  an  automatic  CLR  is  per- 
formed when  an  RS-232  channel  is  OPENed  (This  is  due  to  the  allocation  of  512  bytes 
at  the  top  of  memory.)  Also  remember  that  your  program  will  be  destroyed  if  512 
bytes  of  space  are  not  available  at  the  time  of  the  OPEN  statement. 


GETTING  DATA  FROM  AN  RS-232  CHANNEL 

When  getting  data  from  an  RS-232  channel,  the  Commodore  64  re- 
ceiver buffer  will  hold  up  to  255  characters  before  the  buffer  overflows. 
This  is  indicated  in  the  RS-232  status  word  (ST  in  BASIC,  or  RSSTAT  in 
machine  language).  If  an  overflow  occurs,  then  all  characters  received 
during  a full  buffer  condition,  from  that  point  on,  are  lost.  Obviously,  it 
pays  to  keep  the  buffer  as  clear  as  possible. 

If  you  wish  to  receive  RS-232  data  at  high  speeds  (BASIC  can  only  go 
so  fast,  especially  considering  garbage  collects.  This  can  cause  the  re- 
ceiver buffer  to  overflow),  you  will  have  to  use  machine  language 
routines  to  handle  this  type  of  data  burst. 

BASIC  SYNTAX: 

Recommended:  GET#lfn,  <string  variable> 

NOT  Recommended:  INPUT#lfn  ,<variable  list> 

KERNAL  ENTRIES: 

CHKIN  ($FFC6)  See  Memory  Map  for  more  information  on  entry  and 
exit  conditions. 

GETIN  ($FFE4)  See  Memory  Map  for  more  information  on  entry  and 
exit  conditions. 

CHRIN  ($FFCF)  See  Memory  Map  for  more  information  on  entry  and 
exit  conditions. 


352  INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


NOTES: 

If  the  word  length  is  less  than  8 bits,  all  unused  bit(s)  will  be  assigned  a value  of 
zero. 

If  a GET#  does  not  find  any  data  in  the  buffer,  the  character  ""  (a  null)  is  returned. 

If  INPUT#  is  used,  then  the  system  will  hang  in  a waiting  condition  until  a non-null 
character  and  a following  carriage  return  is  received.  Therefore,  if  the  Clear  To  Send 
(CTS)  or  DataSsette  Ready  (DSR)  line(s)  disappear  during  character  INPUT#,  the  sys- 
tem will  hang  in  a RESTORE-only  state.  This  is  why  the  INPUT#  and  CHRIN  routines 
are  NOT  recommended. 

The  routine  CHKIN  handles  the  x-line  handshake  which  follows  the  EIA  standard 
(August  1979)  for  RS-232-C  interfaces.  (The  Request  To  Send  (RTS),  CTS,  and  Re- 
ceived line  signal  (DCD)  lines  are  implemented  with  the  Commodore  64  computer 
defined  as  the  Data  Terminal  device.) 


SENDING  DATA  TO  AN  RS-232  CHANNEL 


When  sending  data,  the  output  buffer  can  hold  255  characters  before 
a full  buffer  hold-off  occurs.  The  system  will  wait  in  the  CHROUT  routine 
until  transmission  is  allowed  or  the  and  keys 

are  used  to  recover  the  system  through  a WARM  START. 


BASIC  SYNTAX: 

CMD  Ifn  — acts  same  as  in  the  BASIC  specifications. 
PRINT#lfn,<variable  list> 

KERNAL  ENTRIES: 

CHKOUT  ($FFC9)  — See  Memory  Map  for  more  information  on  entry 
and  exit  conditions. 

CHROUT  ($FFD2)  — See  Memory  Map  for  more  information  on  entry 
conditions. 


INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


353 


IMPORTANT  NOTES:  There  is  no  carriage-return  delay  built  into  the  output  channel. 
This  means  that  a normal  RS-232  printer  cannot  correctly  print,  unless  some  form  of 
hold-off  (asking  the  Commodore  64  to  wait)  or  internal  buffering  is  implemented  by 
the  printer.  The  hold-off  can  easily  be  implemented  in  your  program.  If  a CTS  (x-line) 
handshake  is  implemented,  the  Commodore  64  buffer  will  fill,  and  then  hold-off  more 
output  until  transmission  is  allowed  by  the  RS-232  device.  X-line  handshaking  is  a 
handshake  routine  that  uses  multi-lines  for  receiving  and  transmitting  data. 

The  routine  CHKOUT  handles  the  x-line  handshake,  which  follows  the  EIA  standard 
(August  1979)  for  RS-232-C  interfaces.  The  RTS,  CTS,  and  DCD  lines  are  implemented 
with  the  Commodore  64  defined  as  the  Data  Terminal  Device. 


CLOSING  AN  RS-232  DATA  CHANNEL 

Closing  an  RS-232  file  discards  all  data  in  the  buffers  at  the  time  of 
execution  (whether  or  not  it  had  been  transmitted  or  printed  out),  stops 
all  RS-232  transmitting  and  receiving,  sets  the  RTS  and  transmitted  data 
(Sout)  lines  high,  and  removes  both  RS-232  buffers. 


BASIC  SYNTAX: 
CLOSE  Ifn 


KERNAL  ENTRY: 

CLOSE  ($FFC3)  See  Memory  Map  for  more  information  on  entry  and 
exit  conditions. 


- Care  should  be  taken  to  ensure  all  data  is  transmitted  before  closing  the 
channel.  A way  to  check  this  from  BASIC  is: 


100  SS  = ST:  IF(SS=0  OR  SS  = 8)  THEN  100 
110  CLOSE  Ifn 


354  INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


Table  6-1.  User-Port  Lines 


(6526  DEVICE  #2  Loc. 

$DD00 

— $DD0F) 

PIN 

ID 

6526 

ID 

DESCRIPTION 

EIA 

ABV 

IN/ 

OUT 

MODES 

C 

PBO 

RECEIVED  DATA 

(BB) 

Sin 

IN 

1 2 

D 

PB1 

REQUEST  TO  SEND 

(CA) 

RTS 

OUT 

1*2 

E 

PB2 

DATA  TERMINAL  READY 

(CD) 

DTR 

OUT 

1*2 

F 

PB3 

RING  INDICATOR 

(CE) 

Rl 

IN 

3 

H 

PB4 

RECEIVED  LINE  SIGNAL 

(CF) 

DCD 

IN 

2 

J 

PB5 

UNASSIGNED 

( ) 

XXX 

IN 

3 

K 

PB6 

CLEAR  TO  SEND 

(CB) 

CTS 

IN 

2 

L 

PB7 

DATA  SET  READY 

(CC) 

DSR 

IN 

2 

B 

FLAG2 

RECEIVED  DATA 

(BB) 

Sin 

IN 

1 2 

M 

PA2 

TRANSMITTED  DATA 

(BA) 

S0ut 

OUT 

1 2 

A 

GND 

PROTECTIVE  GROUND 

(AA) 

GND 

1 2 

N 

GND 

SIGNAL  GROUND 

(AB) 

GND 

1 2 3 

MODES: 

1)  3-LINE  INTERFACE  (Sin/Sout,GND) 

2)  X-LINE  INTERFACE 

3)  USER  AVAILABLE  ONLY  (Unused/unimplemented  in 
* These  lines  are  held  high  during  3-LINE  mode. 

code.) 

[7]  [6]  [5]  [4]  [3]  [2]  [1]  [0]  (Machine  Lang.  — RSSTAT 

:_PARITY  ERROR  BIT 

::::::  : FRAMING  ERROR  BIT 

: RECEIVER  BUFFER  OVERRUN  BIT 

: RECEIVER  BUFFER  — EMPTY 

(USE  TO  TEST  AFTER  A GET#) 

: : CTS  SIGNAL  MISSING  BIT 

: -UNUSED  BIT 

: DSR  SIGNAL  MISSING  BIT 

: BREAK  DETECTED  BIT 


Figure  6-3.  RS-232  Status  Register. 

INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE  355 


r 


NOTES: 

If  the  611=0,  then  no  error  has  been  detected. 

The  RS-232  status  register  can  be  read  from  BASIC  using  the  variable  ST. 

If  ST  is  read  by  BASIC  or  by  using  the  KERNAL  READST  routine  the  RS-232  status 
word  is  cleared  when  you  exit.  If  multiple  uses  of  the  STATUS  word  are  necessary  the 
ST  should  be  assigned  to  another  variable.  For  example: 

SR=ST:  REM  ASSIGNS  ST  TO  SR 

The  RS-232  status  is  read  (and  cleared)  only  when  the  RS-232  channel  was  the  last 
external  I/O  used. 


SAMPLE  BASIC  PROGRAMS 


10  REM  THIS  PROGRAM  SENDS  AND  RECEIVES  DATA 
TO/FROM  A SILENT  780 

11  REM  TERMINAL  MODIFIED  FOR  PET  ASCII 

20  REM  TI  SILENT  700  SET-UP '•  300  BAUD,  7-BIT  ASCII, 
MARK  PARITY, 

21  REM  FULL  DUPLEX 

30  REM  SAME  SET-UP  AT  COMPUTER  USING  3-LINE 
INTERFACE 

1 @0  OPEN  2,2,3,  CHR$  (.  6+32  > +CHR$  C 32+ 1 28  ) : REM  OPEN 
THE  CHANNEL 

110  GET#2, A$ : REM  TURN  ON  THE  RECEIVER  CHANNEL 
<TQSS  A NULL > 

200  REM  MAIN  LOOP 

210  GET  B$ : REM  GET  FROM  COMPUTER  KEYBOARD 
220  IF  B$0" " THEN  PRINT#2,  B$;  : REM  IF  A KEY 
PRESSED,  SEND  TO  TERMINAL 

230  GET#2,  C$ : REM  GET  A KEY  FROM  THE  TERMINAL 

240  PRINT  B*.:  C$;  : REM  PRINT  ALL  INPUTS  TO  COMPUTER 

SCREEN 

250  3R=ST : IF  SR--0  OR  SR=8  THEN  200:  REM  CHECK 
STATUS,  IF  GOOD  THEN  CONTINUE 
300  REM  ERROR  REPORTING 
310  PRINT  "ERROR: 

320  IF  SR  AND  1 THEN  PRINT  "PARITY" 

330  IF  SR  AND  2 THEN  PRINT  "FRAME" 

340  IF  SR  AND  4 THEN  PRINT  "RECEIVER  BUFFER  FULL" 

350  IF  SR  AND  128  THEN  PRINT  "BREAK" 

360  IF  ( PEEK C 673 > AND  1}  THEN  360: REM  wf (jj  UNTIL 
ALL  CHARS-  TRANSMITTED 
370  CLOSE  2:  END 


356  INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


10  REM  THIS  PROGRAM  SENDS  AND  RECEIVES  TRUE  ASCII 
DATA 

100  OPEN  5,2V3,CHR$C6) 

110  DIM  FXC255>,TX<255) 

200  FOR  ,T=32  TO  64  ■ TZ(  J)*J : NErt  & 

210  T5fi  <1 3 ) * 1 3 : T/.  < 20  ) *8 : RV=  1 8 : CT=0 

220  FOR  J*65  TO  90 : K~ J+32 : TX < J ) «K : NEXT 

230  FOR  J=91  TO  95 : TX< J)«J : NEXT 

240  FOR  J=193  TO  218 : K*J~128  *■  TX<J)*K : NEXT 

250  TX<146)»16:TX<133)*16 

260  FOR  J~0  TO  255 

270  K~TX<:J> 

280  IF  KO0THEN  FX<K)=J : FX<.K+128>=J 
290  NEXT 

300  PRINT  " "CHR$( 147) 

310  GET#5,A$ 

320  IF  A$=n  "OR  STO0  THEN  360 
330  PRINT  " " CHR$ < 1 57 ) CHR$ < FX ( ASC ( A$ ) ) ) J 
340  IF  F5i<ASC<A$)>*34  THEN  POKE212,0 
350  GOTO  310 

360  PR I NTCHR$ < R V ) " " CHR$ < 1 57 ) ; CHR$ < 1 46  > J : GET  A$ 
370  IF  fl$<> " " THENPR I NT #5 > CHR$ < TX < ASC < A$ ) ) > 

380  CT*CT+1 

390  IF  CT =8  THENCT -0 : RV« 1 64-RV 
410  GOTO310 

RECEIVER/TRANSMITTER  BUFFER  BASE  LOCATION 
POINTERS 


$00F7—  RIBUF — A two-byte  pointer  to  the  Receiver  Buffer  base  loca- 
tion. 

$OOF9-ROBUF — A two-byte  pointer  to  the  Transmitter  Buffer  base 
location. 


The  two  locations  above  are  set  up  by  the  OPEN  KERNAL  routine,  each 
pointing  to  a different  256-byte  buffer.  They  are  de-allocated  by  writing 
a zero  into  the  high  order  bytes  ($00F8  and  $00FA),  which  is  done  by  the 
CLOSE  KERNAL  entry.  They  may  also  be  allocated/de-allocated  by  the 
machine  language  programmer  for  his/her  own  purposes,  removing/ 
creating  only  the  buffer(s)  required.  When  using  a machine  language 
program  that  allocates  these  buffers,  care  must  be  taken  to  make  sure 
that  the  top  of  memory  pointers  stay  correct,  especially  if  BASIC  pro- 
grams are  expected  to  run  at  the  same  time. 


INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE  357 


ZERO-PAGE  MEMORY  LOCATIONS  AND  USAGE  FOR 
RS-232  SYSTEM  INTERFACE 


$00A7— INBIT  — Receiver  input  bit  temp  storage. 

$00A8— BITCI  — Receiver  bit  count  in. 

$00A9—  RINONE  — Receiver  flag  Start  bit  check. 

$OOAA-RIDATA  — Receiver  byte  buffer/assembly  location. 

$OOAB— RIPRTY  — Receiver  parity  bit  storage. 

$00B4— BITTS  — Transmitter  bit  count  out. 

$00B5— NXTBIT  — Transmitter  next  bit  to  be  sent. 

$00B6-  RODATA  — Transmitter  byte  buffer/disassembly  location. 

All  the  above  zero-page  locations  are  used  locally  and  are  only  given 
as  a guide  to  understand  the  associated  routines.  These  cannot  be  used 
directly  by  the  BASIC  or  KERNAL  level  programmer  to  do  RS-232  type 
things.  The  system  RS-232  routines  must  be  used. 

NONZERO-PAGE  MEMORY  LOCATIONS  AND  USAGE  FOR 
RS-232  SYSTEM  INTERFACE 

General  RS-232  storage: 

$0293-M51CTR — Pseudo  6551  control  register  (see  Figure  6-1). 
$0294-M51COR  — Pseudo  6551  command  register  (see  Figure  6-2). 
$0295— M51 AJB  — Two  bytes  following  the  control  and  command 
registers  in  the  file  name  field.  These  locations  contain  the 
baud  rate  for  the  start  of  the  bit  test  during  the  interface 
activity,  which,  in  turn,  is  used  to  calculate  baud  rate. 
$0297— RSSTAT — The  RS-232  status  register  (see  Figure  6-3). 
$0298-BITNUM  — The  number  of  bits  to  be  sent/received. 

$0299— BAUDOF  — Two  bytes  that  are  equal  to  the  time  of  one  bit 
cell.  (Based  on  system  clock/baud  rate.) 


358  INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


$029B— RIDBE  — The  byte  index  to  the  end  of  the  receiver  FIFO 
buffer. 

$029C-RIDBS  — The  byte  index  to  the  start  of  the  receiver  FIFO 
buffer. 

$029D-RODBS  — The  byte  index  to  the  start  of  the  transmitter  FIFO 
buffer. 

$029E-RODBE — The  byte  index  to  the  end  of  the  transmitter  FIFO 
buffer. 

$02A1  -ENABL  — Holds  current  active  interrupts  in  the  CIA  #2  ICR. 

When  bit  4 is  turned  on  means  that  the  system  is  waiting  for 
the  Receiver  Edge.  When  bit  1 is  turned  on  then  the  system  is 
receiving  data.  When  bit  0 is  turned  on  then  the  system  is 
transmitting  data. 


THE  USER  PORT 


The  user  port  is  meant  to  connect  the  Commodore  64  to  the  outside 
world.  By  using  the  lines  available  at  this  port,  you  can  connect  the 
Commodore  64  to  a printer,  a Votrax  Type  and  Talk,  a MODEM,  even 
another  computer. 

The  port  on  the  Commodore  64  is  directly  connected  to  one  of  the 
6526  CIA  chips.  By  programming,  the  CIA  will  connect  to  many  other 
devices. 

PORT  PIN  DESCRIPTION 


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  11  12 


ABCDEFHJ  KLMN 


INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


359 


PORT  PIN  DESCRIPTION 


PIN 

DESCRIPTION 

NOTES 

TOP  SIDE 

1 

GROUND 

2 

+5V 

(100  mA  MAX.) 

3 

RESET 

By  grounding  this  pin,  the  Commodore 
64  will  do  a COLD  START,  resetting 
completely.  The  pointers  to  a BASIC 
program  will  be  reset,  and  memory 
will  be  cleared.  This  is  also  a RESET 
output  for  the  external  devices. 

4 

CNT1 

Serial  port  counter  from  CIA  #1  (SEE 
CIA  SPECS). 

5 

SP1 

Serial  port  from  CIA  #1  (SEE  6526  CIA 
SPECS). 

6 

CNT2 

Serial  port  counter  from  CIA  #2  (SEE 
CIA  SPECS). 

7 

SP2 

Serial  port  from  CIA  #1  (SEE  6526  CIA 
SPECS). 

8 

PC2 

Handshaking  line  from  CIA  #2  (SEE 
CIA  SPECS). 

9 

SERIAL 

This  pin  is  connected  to  the  ATN  line  of 

ATN 

the  serial  bus. 

10 

9 VAC  4-phase 

Connected  directly  to  the  Commodore 

11 

9 VAC  — phase 

64  transformer  (50  mA  MAX.). 

12 

GND 

BOTTOM  SIDE 

A 

GND 

The  Commodore  64  gives  you  control 

B 

FLAG2 

over  PORT  B on  CIA  chip  #1.  Eight 

C 

PBO 

lines  for  input  or  output  are  available, 

D 

PB1 

as  well  as  2 lines  for  handshaking  with 

E 

PB2 

an  outside  device.  The  I/O  lines  for 

F 

PB3 

PORT  B are  controlled  by  two  loca- 

H 

PB4 

tions.  One  is  the  PORT  itself,  and  is  lo- 

J 

PB5 

cated  at  56577  ($DD01  HEX).  Naturally 

K 

PB6 

you  PEEK  it  to  read  an  INPUT,  or  POKE 

L 

PB7 

it  to  set  an  OUTPUT.  Each  of  the  eight 

M 

PA2 

I/O  lines  can  be  set  up  as  either  an 

N 

GND 

INPUT  or  an  OUTPUT  by  setting  the 
DATA  DIRECTION  REGISTER  properly. 

360  INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


The  DATA  DIRECTION  REGISTER  has  its  location  at  56579  ($DD03 
hex).  Each  of  the  eight  lines  in  the  PORT  has  a BIT  in  the  eight-bit  DATA 
DIRECTION  REGISTER  (DDR)  which  controls  whether  that  line  will  be  an 
input  or  an  output.  If  a bit  in  the  DDR  is  a ONE,  the  corresponding  line 
of  the  PORT  will  be  an  OUTPUT.  If  a bit  in  the  DDR  is  a ZERO,  the 
corresponding  line  of  the  PORT  will  be  an  INPUT.  For  example,  if  bit  3 of 
the  DDR  is  set  to  1,  then  line  3 of  the  PORT  will  be  an  output.  A further 
example: 

If  the  DDR  is  set  like  this: 

BIT  #:  7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 
VALUE:  0 0 1 1 10  0 0 

You  can  see  that  lines  5,4,  and  3 will  be  outputs  since  those  bits  are 
ones.  The  rest  of  the  lines  will  be  inputs,  since  those  lines  are  zeros. 

To  PEEK  or  POKE  tne  USER  port,  it  is  necessary  to  use  both  the  DDR 
and  the  PORT  itself. 

Remember  that  the  PEEK  and  POKE  statements  want  a number  from 
0—255.  The  numbers  given  in  the  example  must  be  translated  into  dec- 
imal before  they  can  be  used.  The  value  would  be: 

25  + 24  + 23  = 32  + 16  + 8 = 56 

Notice  that  the  bit  # for  the  DDR  is  the  same  number  that  = 2 raised  to 
a power  to  turn  the  bit  value  on. 

(16  = 2|4  = 2X2X2X2,  8 = 2|3  = 2X2X2) 

The  two  other  lines,  FLAG1  and  PA2  are  different  from  the  rest  of  the 
USER  PORT.  These  two  lines  are  mainly  for  HANDSHAKING,  and  are 
programmed  differently  from  port  B. 

Handshaking  is  needed  when  two  devices  communicate.  Since  one 
device  may  run  at  a different  speed  than  another  device  it  is  necessary 
to  give  the  devices  some  way  of  knowing  what  the  other  device  is  doing. 
Even  when  the  devices  are  operating  at  the  same  speed,  handshaking  is 
necessary  to  let  the  other  know  when  data  is  to  be  sent,  and  if  it  has 
been  received.  The  FLAG1  line  has  special  characteristics  which  make  it 
well  suited  for  handshaking. 

FLAG1  is  a negative  edge  sensitive  input  which  can  be  used  as  a 
general  purpose  interrupt  input.  Any  negative  transition  on  the  FLAG  line 
will  set  the  FLAG  interrupt  bit.  If  the  FLAG  interrupt  is  enabled,  this  will 


INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE  361 


cause  an  INTERRUPT  REQUEST.  If  the  FLAG  bit  is  not  enabled,  it  can  be 
polled  from  the  interrupt  register  under  program  control. 

PA2  is  bit  2 of  PORT  A of  the  CIA.  It  is  controlled  like  any  other  bit  in 
the  port.  The  port  is  located  at  56576  ($DD00).  The  data  direction  regis- 
ter is  located  at  56578  ($DD02.) 

FOR  MORE  INFORMATION  ON  THE  6526  SEE  THE  CHIP  SPECIFICA- 
TIONS IN  APPENDIX  M. 

THE  SERIAL  BUS 

The  serial  bus  is  a daisy  chain  arrangement  designed  to  let  the  Com- 
modore 64  communicate  with  devices  such  as  the  VIC-1541  DISK  DRIVE 
and  the  VIC-1525  GRAPHICS  PRINTER.  The  advantage  of  the  serial  bus 
is  that  more  than  one  device  can  be  connected  to  the  port.  Up  to  5 
devices  can  be  connected  to  the  serial  bus  at  one  time. 

There  are  three  types  of  operation  over  a serial  bus — CONTROL, 
TALK,  and  LISTEN.  A CONTROLLER  device  is  one  which  controls  operation 
of  the  serial  bus.  A TALKER  transmits  data  onto  the  bus.  A LISTENER 
receives  data  from  the  bus. 

The  Commodore  64  is  the  controller  of  the  bus.  It  also  acts  as  a 
TALKER  (when  sending  data  to  the  printer,  for  example)  and  as  a LIS- 
TENER (when  loading  a program  from  the  disk  drive,  for  example). 
Other  devices  may  be  either  LISTENERS  (the  printer),  TALKERS,  or  both 
(the  disk  drive).  Only  the  Commodore  64  can  act  as  the  controller. 

All  devices  connected  on  the  serial  bus  will  receive  all  the  data 
transmitted  over  the  bus.  To  allow  the  Commodore  64  to  route  data  to  its 
intended  destination,  each  device  has  a bus  ADDRESS.  By  using  this 
device  address,  the  Commodore  64  can  control  access  to  the  bus.  Ad- 
dresses on  the  serial  bus  range  from  4 to  31. 

The  Commodore  64  can  COMMAND  a particular  device  to  TALK  or 
LISTEN.  When  the  Commodore  64  commands  a device  to  TALK,  the  de- 
vice will  begin  putting  data  onto  the  serial  bus.  When  the  Commodore 
64  commands  a device  to  LISTEN,  the  device  addressed  will  get  ready  to 
receive  data  (from  the  Commodore  64  or  from  another  device  on  the 
bus).  Only  one  device  can  TALK  on  the  bus  at  a time;  otherwise,  the  data 
will  collide  and  the  system  will  crash  in  confusion.  However,  any  number 
of  devices  can  LISTEN  at  the  same  time  to  one  TALKER. 


362  INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


COMMON  SERIAL  BUS  ADDRESSES 


NUMBER 

DEVICE 

4 or  5 

8 

VIC-1525  GRAPHIC  PRINTER 
VIC-1541  DISK  DRIVE 

Other  device  addresses  are  possible.  Each  device  has  its  own  ad- 
dress. Certain  devices  (like  the  Commodore  64  printer)  provide  a choice 
between  two  addresses  for  the  convenience  of  the  user. 

The  SECONDARY  ADDRESS  is  to  let  the  Comrriodore  64  transmit  setup 
information  to  a device.  For  example,  to  OPEN  a connection  on  the  bus 
to  the  printer,  and  have  it  print  in  UPPER/LOWER  case,  use  the  following: 

OPEN  1,4,7 

where, 

1 is  the  logical  file  number  (the  number  you  PRINT#  to), 

4 is  the  ADDRESS  of  the  printer,  and 

7 is  the  SECONDARY  ADDRESS  that  tells  the  printer  to  go  into  UPPER/ 
LOWER  case  mode. 

There  are  6 lines  used  in  serial  bus  operation  — 3 input  and  3 output. 
The  3 input  lines  bring  data,  control,  and  timing  signals  into  the  Com- 
modore 64.  The  3 output  lines  send  data,  control,  and  timing  signals 
from  the  Commodore  64  to  external  devices  on  the  serial  bus. 


SERIAL  BUS  PINOUTS 


PIN 

DESCRIPTION 

1 

SERIAL  SRQ  IN 

2 

GND 

3 

SERIAL  ATN  IN/OUT 

4 

SERIAL  CLK  IN/OUT 

5 

SERIAL  DATA  IN/OUT 

6 

NO  CONNECTION 

INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE  363 


SERIAL  SRQ  IN:  (SERIAL  SERVICE  REQUEST  IN) 


Any  device  on  the  serial  bus  can  bring  this  signal  LOW  when  it  re- 
quires attention  from  the  Commodore  64.  The  Commodore  64  will  then 
take  care  of  the  device.  (See  Figure  6-4). 


BYTE  SENT  UNDER  ATTENTION  (TO  DEVICES)- 


h 


NORMAL 
DATA  BYTES 


ATN 


CLOCK 


DATA 


TatH 

raw 


injuinruinn 


| TNE>  1 H— TV 


LoJLJUJUJl±JUJbJL£) 


HtrK 


JthU  LfB 

DATA  VALID 


MSB  I 

krFJ 


LISTENER  READY-FOR-DATA  LISTENER  DATA-ACCEPTED 

END-OR-IDENTIFY  HANDSHAKE  (LAST  BYTE  IN  MESSAGE) 


ATN 


TALKER  READY-TO-SEND 

CLOCK  mrui_ 


^ ujyybj  l 

MSB  I 

-Jth 


— u 

-TyeJteiL 

1 A* 


TALKER  SENDING 

“uiniiJLJ^ c 

Ts  + |^TV  | 

uz 


-try 


J tf  L4-1 


FR 


ATN 


LISTENER  READY-FOR-DATA 
EOI-TIMEOUT  HANDSHAKE  SYSTEM  LINE 
LISTENER  READY-FOR-DATA  RELEASE 

TALK-ATTENTION  TURN  AROUND  (TALKER  AND  LISTENER  REVERSED) 

DEVICE  ACKNOWLEDGES  IT  IS  NOW  TALKER 
TALKER  READY-TO-SEND 


CLOCK 


jumn 


I HtrIv 

DATA  UJUJUJliJ  L TjkI 

MSB  I 

I tf  I 


innnjinnrui 


^ 1/ 1 -f  Tv  i 

■^oJlilUJUJliJUiUJErL 

LSB  MSB  I 

— 4 TF  U- 


-Jth  L 

READY  FOR  DATA 


BECOMES  LISTENER,  CLOCK  = HIGH,  DATA  LOW 

Figure  6-4.  Serial 


364 


INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


SERIAL  ATN  IN/OUT:  (SERIAL  ATTENTION  IN/OUT) 

The  Commodore  64  uses  this  signal  to  start  a command  sequence  for 
a device  on  the  serial  bus.  When  the  Commodore  64  brings  this  signal 
LOW,  all  other  devices  on  the  bus  start  listening  for  the  Commodore  64 
to  transmit  an  address.  The  device  addressed  must  respond  in  a preset 
period  of  time;  otherwise,  the  Commodore  64  will  assume  that  the  de- 
vice addressed  is  not  on  the  bus,  and  will  return  an  error  in  the  STATUS 
WORD.  (See  Figure  6-4). 


TALKER  READY-TO-SEND 

TALKER  SENDING 


-Ith 


TneY  I -|-TV 

IbJUUJUJliJUJbJliJ 

LSB  MSB 


-|tb 


* l\ 


l/H~Tv 


t 


LSB 
♦ 

DATA  VALID 


LISTENER  READY-FOR-DATA 


Mil 

tfLJthU 

LISTENER  DATA-ACCEPTED 


SERIAL  BUS  TIMING 


Description 

Symbol 

Min. 

Typ. 

Max. 

ATN  RESPONSE  (REQUIRED)1 

t— 

< 

y~ 

— 

_ 

1000/a 

LISTENER  HOLD-OFF 

th 

0 

— 

OO 

NON-EOI  RESPONSE  TO  RFD2 

Tne 

— 

40/as 

200/as 

BIT  SET-UP  TALKER4 

TS 

20/as 

70/as 

— 

DATA  VALID 

TV 

20/as 

20/as 

— 

FRAME  HANDSHAKE3 

TF 

0 

20 

1000/is 

FRAME  TO  RELEASE  OF  ATN 

Tr 

20/as 

— 

— 

BETWEEN  BYTES  TIME 

tbb 

100/as 

— 

— 

EOI  RESPONSE  TIME 

Tye 

200/as 

250/as 

— 

EOI  RESPONSE  HOLD  TIME5 

Tei 

60/as 

— 

— 

TALKER  RESPONSE  LIMIT 

Try 

0 

30/as 

60/as 

BYTE-ACKNOWLEDGE4 

tpr 

20/as 

30/as 

— 

TALK-ATTENTION  RELEASE 

Tjk 

20/as 

30/as 

100/AS 

TALK-ATTENTION  ACKNOWLEDGE 

tdc 

0 

— 

— 

TALK-ATTENTION  ACK.  HOLD 

Tda 

80/as 

— 

— 

EOI  ACKNOWLEDGE 

tfr 

60/as 

— 

— 

Notes: 

1.  If  maximum  time  exceeded,  device  not  present  error. 

2.  If  maximum  time  exceeded,  EOI  response  required. 

3.  If  maximum  time  exceeded,  frame  error. 

4.  Tv  and  TPR  minimum  must  be  60/as  for  external  device  to  be  a talker. 

5.  Te,  minimum  must  be  80/as  for  external  device  to  be  a listener. 


Bus  Timing. 


INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE  365 


SERIAL  CLK  IN/OUT:  (SERIAL  CLOCK  IN/OUT) 

This  signal  is  used  for  timing  the  data  sent  on  the  serial  bus.  (See 
Figure  6-4). 

SERIAL  DATA  IN/OUT: 

Data  on  the  serial  bus  is  transmitted  one  bit  at  a time  on  this  line.  (See 
Figure  6-4.) 

THE  EXPANSION  PORT 

The  expansion  connector  is  a 44-pin  (22/22)  female  edge  connector  on 
the  back  of  the  Commodore  64.  With  the  Commodore  64  facing  you,  the 
expansion  connector  is  on  the  far  right  of  the  back  of  the  computer.  To 
use  the  connector,  a 44-pin  (22/22)  male  edge  connector  is  required. 

This  port  is  used  for  expansions  of  the  Commodore  64  system  which 
require  access  to  the  address  bus  or  the  data  bus  of  the  computer. 
Caution  is  necessary  when  using  the  expansion  bus,  because  it's  possi- 
ble to  damage  the  Commodore  64  by  a malfunction  of  your  equipment. 
The  expansion  bus  is  arranged  as  follows: 

22  21  20  1918  17  1615  14  13  12  11  10  9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 

1 ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■ 


ZY  XWVUTSRPNMLKJHFEDCBA 
The  signals  available  on  the  connector  are  as  follows: 


NAME 

PIN 

DESCRIPTION 

GND 

1 

System  ground 

+5  VDC 

2 

(Total  USER  PORT  and  CARTRIDGE  devices  can 

+5  VDC 

3 

draw  no  more  than  450  mA.) 

IRQ 

4 

Interrupt  Request  line  to  6502  (active  low) 

R/W 

DOT 

5 

Read/Write 

CLOCK 

6 

8.18  MHz  video  dot  clock 

1/01 

7 

I/O  block  1 @ $DE00— $DEFF  (active  low)  unbuffered  I/O 

GAME 

8 

active  low  Is  ttl  input 

EXROM 

9 

active  low  Is  ttl  input 

1/02 

10 

I/O  block  2 @ $DF00-$DFFF  (active  low)  buff'ed  Is  ttl 
output 

366  INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


NAME 

PIN 

DESCRIPTION 

ROML 

11 

8K  decoded  RAM/ROAA  block  @ $8000  (active  low) 

buffered  Is  ttl  output 

BA 

12 

Bus  available  signal  from  the  VIC-II  chip 

unbuffered  1 Is  load  max. 

DMA 

13 

Direct  memory  access 

request  line  (active  low  input) 

Is  ttl  input 

D7 

14 

Data  bus  bit  7 ^ 

D6 

15 

Data  bus  bit  6 

05 

16 

Data  bus  bit  5 

D4 

17 

Data  bus  bit  4 

► 

unbuffered,  1 Is  ttl  load  max 

D3 

18 

Data  bus  bit  3 

D2 

19 

Data  bus  bit  2 

D1 

20 

Data  bus  bit  1 

DO 

21 

Data  bus  bit  0 ^ 

GND 

22 

System  ground 

GND 

A 

ROMH 

B 

8K  decoded  RAM/ROM  block  @ $E000  buffered 

RESET 

C 

6502  RESET  pin  (active  low)  buff'ed  ttl  out/unbuff 'ed  in 

NMI 

D 

6502  Non  Maskable  Interrupt  (active  low)  buff'ed  ttl  out, 

unbuff'ed  in 

02 

E 

Phase  2 system  clock 

A15 

F 

Address  bus  bit  15  ^ 

A14 

H 

Address  bus  bit  14 

A13 

J 

Address  bus  bit  13 

A12 

K 

Address  bus  bit  12 

All 

L 

Address  bus  bit  1 1 

A10 

M 

Address  bus  bit  10 

A9 

N 

Address  bus  bit  9 

A8 

P 

Address  bus  bit  8 

unbuffered,  1 Is  ttl  load  max 

A 7 

R 

Address  bus  bit  7 

A6 

S 

Address  bus  bit  6 

A5 

T 

Address  bus  bit  5 

A4 

U 

Address  bus  bit  4 

A3 

V 

Address  bus  bit  3 

A2 

w 

Address  bus  bit  2 

A1 

X 

Address  bus  bit  1 

AO 

Y 

Address  bus  bit  0 

> 

GND 

z 

System  ground 

Overbar 

means  active  low 

i 


INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


367 


Following  is  a description  of  some  important  lines  on  the  expansion 
port: 

Pins  1 ,22,  A, Z are  connected  to  the  system  ground. 

Pin  6 is  the  DOT  CLOCK.  This  is  the  8.18-MHz  video  dot  clock.  All 
system  timing  is  derived  from  this  clock. 

Pin  12  is  the  BA  (BUS  AVAILABLE)  signal  from  the  VIC-II  chip.  This  line 
will  go  low  3 cycles  before  the  VIC-II  takes  over  the  system  busses,  and 
remains  low  until  the  VIC-II  is  finished  fetching  display  information. 

Pin  13  is  the  DMA  (DIRECT  MEMORY  ACCESS)  line.  When  this  line  is 
pulled  low,  the  address  bus,  the  data  bus,  and  the  Read/Write  line  of 
the  6510  processor  chip  enter  high-impedance  state  mode.  This  allows 
an  external  processor  to  take  control  of  the  system  busses.  This  line 
should  only  be  pulled  low  when  the  02  clock  is  low.  Also,  since  the 
VIC-II  chip  will  continue  to  perform  display  DMA,  the  external  device 
must  conform  to  the  VIC-II  timing.  (See  VIC-II  timing  diagram.)  This  line 
is  pulled  up  on  the  Commodore  64. 


Z-80  MICROPROCESSOR  CARTRIDGE 

Reading  this  book  and  using  your  computer  has  shown  you  just  how 
versatile  your  Commodore  64  really  is.  But  what  makes  this  machine 
even  more  capable  of  meeting  your  needs  is  the  addition  of  peripheral 
equipment.  Peripherals  are  things  like  Datassette™  recorders,  disk 
drives,  printers,  and  modems.  All  these  items  can  be  added  to  your 
Commodore  64  through  the  various  ports  and  sockets  on  the  back  of 
your  machine.  The  thing  that  makes  Commodore  peripherals  so  good  is 
the  fact  that  our  peripherals  are  "intelligent."  That  means  that  they  don't 
take  up  valuable  Random  Access  Memory  space  when  they're  in  use. 
You're  free  to  use  all  64K  of  memory  in  your  Commodore  64. 

Another  advantage  of  your  Commodore  64  is  the  fact  most  programs 
you  write  on  your  Commodore  64  today  will  be  upwardly  compatible 
with  any  new  Commodore  computer  you  buy  in  the  future.  This  is  par- 
tially because  of  the  qualities  of  the  computer's  Operating  System  (OS). 

However,  there  is  one  thing  that  the  Commodore  OS  can't  do:  make 
your  programs  compatible  with  a computer  made  by  another  company. 


368  INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


Most  of  the  time  you  won't  even  have  to  think  about  using  another  com- 
pany's computer,  because  your  Commodore  64  is  so  easy  to  use.  But  for 
the  occasional  user  who  wants  to  take  advantage  of  software  that  may 
not  be  available  in  Commodore  64  format  we  have  created  a Commo- 
dore CP/M®  cartridge. 

CP/M®  is  not  a "computer  dependent"  operating  system.  Instead  it 
uses  some  of  the  memory  space  normally  available  for  programming  to 
run  its  own  operating  system.  There  are  advantages  and  disadvantages 
to  this.  The  disadvantages  are  that  the  programs  you  write  will  have  to 
be  shorter  than  the  programs  you  can  write  using  the  Commodore  64's 
built-in  operating  system.  In  addition,  you  can  NOT  use  the  Commodore 
64's  powerful  screen  editing  capabilities.  The  advantages  are  that  you 
can  now  use  a large  amount  of  software  that  has  been  specifically  de- 
signed for  CP/M®  and  the  Z-80  microprocessor,  and  the  programs  that 
you  write  using  the  CP/M®  operating  system  can  be  transported  and  run 
on  any  other  computer  that  has  CP/M®  and  a Z-80  card. 

By  the  way,  most  computers  that  have  a Z-80  microprocessor  require 
that  you  go  inside  the  computer  to  actually  install  a Z-80  card.  With  this 
method  you  have  to  be  very  careful  not  to  disturb  the  delicate  circuitry 
that  runs  the  rest  of  the  computer.  The  Commodore  CP/M®  cartridge 
eliminates  this  hassle  because  our  Z-80  cartridge  plugs  into  the  back  of 
your  Commodore  64  quickly  and  easily,  without  any  messy  wires  that 
can  cause  problems  later. 


USING  COMMODORE  CP/M® 

The  Commodore  Z-80  cartridge  let's  you  run  programs  designed  for  a 
Z-80  microprocessor  on  your  Commodore  64.  The  cartridge  is  provided 
with  a diskette  containing  the  Commodore  CP/M®  operating  system. 


RUNNING  COMMODORE  CP/M® 

To  run  CP/M®: 


D 

2) 

3) 


LOAD  the  CP/M®  program  from  your  disk  drive. 


Type  RUN. 


Hit  the 


RETURN 


key. 


INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE  369 


t 


At  this  point  the  64K  bytes  of  RAM  in  the  Commodore  64  are  accessi- 
ble by  the  built-in  6510  central  processor,  OR  48K  bytes  of  RAM  are 
available  for  the  Z-80  central  processor.  You  can  shift  back  and  forth 
between  these  two  processors,  but  you  can  NOT  use  them  at  the  same 
time  in  a single  program.  This  is  possible  because  of  your  Commodore 
64's  sophisticated  timing  mechanism. 

Below  is  the  memory  address  translation  that  is  performed  on  the 
Z-80  cartridge.  You  should  notice  that  by  adding  4096  bytes  to  the 
memory  locations  used  in  CP /M®  $1000  (hex)  you  equal  the  memory 
addresses  of  the  normal  Commodore  64  operating  system.  The  corre- 
spondence between  Z-80  and  6510  memory  addresses  is  as  follows: 


Z-80  ADDRESSES 

6510  ADDRESSES 

DECIMAL 

HEX 

DECIMAL 

HEX 

0000-4095 

0000-0FFF 

4096-8191 

1000-1FFF 

4096-8191 

1000-1FFF 

8192-12287 

2000-2FFF 

8192-12287 

2000-2FFF 

12288-16383 

3000-3FFF 

12288-16383 

3000-3FFF 

16384-20479 

4000-4FFF 

16384-20479 

4000-4FFF 

20480-24575 

5000-5FFF 

20480-24575 

5000-5FFF 

24576-28671 

6000-6FFF 

24576-28671 

6000- 6FFF 

28672-32767 

7000-7FFF 

28672-32767 

7000-7FFF 

32768-36863 

8000-8FFF 

32768-36863 

8000-8FFF 

36864-40959 

9000-9FFF 

36864-40959 

9000-9FFF 

40960-45055 

A000-AFFF 

40960-45055 

A000-AFFF 

45056-49151 

B000-BFFF 

45056-49151 

B000-BFFF 

49152-53247 

C000-CFFF 

49152-53247 

C000-CFFF 

53248-57343 

D000-DFFF 

53248-57343 

D000-DFFF 

57344-61439 

E000-EFFF 

57344-61439 

E000-EFFF 

61440-65535 

F000-FFFF 

61440-65535 

F000-FFFF 

0000-4095 

0000-0FFF 

370  INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE 


To  TURN  ON  the  Z-80  and  TURN  OFF  the  6510  chip,  type  in  the  follow- 
ing  program: 


10  REM  THIS  PROGRAM  IS  TO  BE  USED  WITH  THE  ZS©  CARD 
20  REM  IT  FIRST  STORES  ZS©  DATA  RT  $1000 
< Z8©~$0000 > 

30  REM  THEN  IT  TURNS  OFF  THE  6518  IRQ'S  AND  ENABLES 
4©  REM  THE  Z80  CARD - THE  ZS©  CARD  MUST  BE  TURNED 
OFF 

5©  REM  TO  REENABLE  THE  6510  SVSTEM. 

180  REM  STORE  ZS©  DATA 

110  READ  B : REM  GET  SIZE  OF  ZS©  CODE  TO  BE  MOVED 
12©  FOR  1=4096  TO  4036+B- 1 : REM  MOVE  CODE 
13©  READ  A : POKE  I,  A 
14©  NEXT  I 

208  REM  RUN  ZS0  CODE 

210  POKE  56333,127  * REM  TURN  OF  651©  IRQ'S 

22©  POKE  56832,00  : REM  TURN  ON  ZS©  CARD 

23©  POKE  56333,129  *•  REM  TURN  ON  6518  IRQ'S  WHEN 

Z8©  DONE 
24©  END 

100©  REM  Z8©  MACHINE  LANGUAGE  CODE  DATA  SECTION 
1010  DATA  18  : REM  SIZE  OF  DATA  TO  BE  PASSED 
110©  REM  Z8©  TURN  ON  CODE 

111©  DATA  0©,00,00  = REM  OUR  ZS©  CARD  REQUIRES 

TURN  ON  TIME  AT  $0000 

120©  REM  Z80  TASK  DATA  HERE 

1210  DATA  33,02,245  : REM  LD  HL,NN  < LOCATION  ON 

screen::* 

122©  DATA  52  : REM  INC  HL  < INCREMENT  THAT  LOCATION) 
130©  REM  ZS0  SELF-TURN  OFF  DATA  HERE 
1310  DATA  62,81  • REM  LD  A , N 

1328  DATA  50,00,206  • REM  LD  CNN), A : I/O  LOCATION 
1330  DATA  @0,00,00  : REM  NOP : NOP : NOP 
134©  DATA  195,00,0©  : REM  JMP  $8888 


For  more  details  about  Commodore  CP/M®  and  the  Z-80  microproces- 
sor look  for  the  cartridge  and  the  Z-80  Reference  Guide  at  your  local 
Commodore  computer  dealer. 


INPUT/OUTPUT  GUIDE  371 


APPENDICES 


373 


APPENDIX  A 


ABBREVIATIONS  FOR 
BASIC  KEYWORDS 


As  a time-saver  when  typing  in  programs  and  commands,  Commo- 
dore 64  BASIC  allows  the  user  to  abbreviate  most  keywords.  The  ab- 
breviation for  PRINT  is  a question  mark.  The  abbreviations  for  other 
words  are  made  by  typing  the  first  one  or  two  letters  of  the  word,  fol- 
lowed by  the  SHIFTed  next  letter  of  the  word.  If  the  abbreviations  are 
used  in  a program  line,  the  keyword  will  LIST  in  the  full  form. 


Com- 

mand 

Abbrevi- 

ation 

Looks  like 
this  on 
screen 

Com- 

mand 

Abbrevi- 

ation 

Looks  like 
this  on 
screen 

A [0 

E 0 

ABS 

A 

SHIFT 

B 

END 

■ SHIFT 

N 

A0 

e m 

AND 

A 

SHIFT 

N 

EXP 

■ SHIFT 

X 

A® 

ASC 

A 

SHIFT 

S 

FN 

NONE 

FN 

aD 

c □ 

□ 

E B 

ATN 

A 

SHIFT 

T 

FOR 

■ SHIFT 

|o 

CHR$ 

C 

SHIFT 

H 

FRE 

■ SHIFT 

R 

ciO 

G B 

CLOSE 

CL 

SHIFT 

O 

GET 

1 SHIFT 

|E 

CLR 

C 

SHIFT 

L 

CD 

c K 

cn 

cos 

D ® 

D B 

GET# 

NONE 

GET# 

GO® 

G □ 

CMD 

C 

SHIFT 

M 

GOSUB 

U SHIFT  E 

CONT 

C 

SHIFT 

O 

GOTO 

5 SHIFT 

I o 

COS 

NONE 

IF 

NONE 

IF 

DATA 

D | 

SHIFT 

A 

INPUT 

NONE 

INPUT 

' 0 

DEF 

D 

SHIFT 

E 

INPUT# 

■ SHIFT 

N 

D □ 

DIM 

D 

SHIFT 

1 

INT 

NONE 

INT 

374  APPENDIX  A 


Com- 

mand 


Abbrevi- 

ation 


LEFT$ 

LEN 

LET 

LIST 

LOAD 

LOG 

MID$ 

NEW 

NEXT 

NOT 

ON 

OPEN 

OR 

PEEK 

POKE 

POS 

PRINT 

PRINT# 

READ 

REM 

RESTORE 

RETURN 


LE  I^UjO 

NONE 

L EBB 
L EgflB 

L 

NONE 

m^^2 

NONE 

N B?H3 
n E!TTa 

NONE 

0^32 

NONE 

P ^22 

p mi 

NONE 

? 

p Q2Q 

r E!IB 

NONE 

RE 

RE 


E 

I 

O 


E 

O 


E 

O 


R 

E 

I s 

I T 


Looks  like 
this  on 
screen 

Com- 

mand 

RIGHTS 

LEN 

RND 

<■  □ 

RUN 

«■  □ 

SAVE 

l n 

SGN 

LOG 

SIN 

SPC( 

NEW 

SQR 

N □ 

STATUS 

N □ 

STEP 

ON 

STOP 

O 

□ 

STR$ 

OR 

SYS 

p B 

TAB( 

pn 

TAN 

POS 

THEN 

? 

TIME 

p □ 

TIMES 

« B 

USR 

REM 

VAL 

RE® 

VERIFY 

Re[E 

WAIT 

Abbrevi- 

ation 


r ma 

R Ulllal 
R EEIEI 
s E!ffSl 
s E!1B1 
s EflBB 
s OH39 
s ggug 

ST 

STHUlil 

s E!H51 

st  QJQ3 

s EH5I 

t BUS 

NONE 

T filial 

Tl 

Tl$ 

u m:im 
v rasiiaa 
v M!HS8 
w mj 


i 

N 

U 

A 

G 

I 

P 

Q 

E 

T 

R 

Y 

A 

H 


S 

A 

E 

A 


Looks  like 
this  on 
screen 

R □ 

R 0 

s0 

s D 

S □ 

*n 

s« 

ST 

ST0 

s D 

ST0 

S □ 

T ® 

TAN 

tQ 

Tl 

Tl$ 

u a 
v a 
vQ 

w® 


APPENDIX  A 375 


APPENDIX  B 


SCREEN  DISPLAY  CODES 


The  following  chart  lists  all  of  the  characters  built  into  the  Commodore 
64  character  sets.  It  shows  which  numbers  should  be  POKEd  into  screen 
memory  (locations  1024-2023)  to  get  a desired  character.  Also  shown  is 
which  character  corresponds  to  a number  PEEKed  from  the  screen. 

Two  character  sets  are  available,  but  only  one  set  at  a time.  This 
means  that  you  cannot  have  characters  from  one  set  on  the  screen  at 
the  same  time  you  have  characters  from  the  other  set  displayed.  The 
sets  are  switched  by  holding  down  the  QQQ  and  B keys  simul- 
taneously. 

From  BASIC,  POKE  53272,21  will  switch  to  upper  case  mode  and 
POKE  53272,23  switches  to  lower  case. 

Any  number  on  the  chart  may  also  be  displayed  in  REVERSE.  The 
reverse  character  code  may  be  obtained  by  adding  128  to  the  values 
shown. 

If  you  want  to  display  a solid  circle  at  location  1504,  POKE  the  code 
for  the  circle  (81)  into  location  1504:  POKE  1504,81. 

There  is  a corresponding  memory  location  to  control  the  color  of  each 
character  displayed  on  the  screen  (locations  55296-56295).  To  change 
the  color  of  the  circle  to  yellow  (color  code  7)  you  would  POKE  the  corre- 
sponding memory  location  (55776)  with  the  character  color:  POKE 
55776,7. 


Refer  to  Appendix  D for  the  complete  screen  and  color  memory  maps, 
along  with  color  codes. 

NOTE:  The  following  POKEs  display  the  same  symbol  in  set  1 and  2:  1,  27—64, 
91-93,  96-104,  106-121,  123-'27. 


SCREEN  CODES 


SET  1 

SET  2 

POKE 

SET  1 

SET  2 

POKE 

SET  1 

SET  2 

POKE 

@ 

0 

C 

C 

3 

F 

f 

6 

A 

a 

1 

D 

d 

4 

G 

g 

7 

B 

b 

2 

E 

e 

5 

H 

h 

8 

376  APPENDIX  B 


SET  1 

SET  2 

POKE 

SET  1 

SET  2 POKE 

SET  1 

SET  2 

POKE 

1 

i 

9 

% 

37 

A 

65 

J 

j 

10 

& 

38 

m 

B 

66 

K 

k 

11 

t 

39 

B 

c 

67 

L 

1 

12 

( 

40 

B 

D 

68 

M 

m 

13 

) 

41 

□ 

E 

69 

N 

n 

14 

* 

42 

□ 

F 

70 

0 

0 

15 

+ 

43 

□ 

G 

71 

P 

P 

16 

? 

44 

□ 

H 

72 

Q 

q 

17 

- 

45 

Q 

1 

73 

R 

r 

18 

46 

□ 

J 

74 

S 

s 

19 

/ 

47 

□ 

K 

75 

T 

t 

20 

0 

48 

□ 

L 

76 

U 

u 

21 

1 

49 

K 

M 

77 

V 

V 

22 

2 

50 

0 

N 

78 

w 

w 

23 

3 

51 

n 

0 

79 

X 

X 

24 

4 

52 

□ 

P 

80 

Y 

y 

25 

5 

53 

□ 

Q 

81 

z 

z 

26 

6 

54 

□ 

R 

82 

[ 

27 

7 

55 

S 

83 

£ 

28 

8 

56 

D 

T 

84 

] 

29 

9 

57 

□ 

U 

85 

T 

30 

58 

V 

86 

<— 

31 

; 

59 

□ 

w 

87 

I SPACE 

1 

32 

< 

60 

X 

88 

! 

33 

= 

61 

CD 

Y 

89 

«• 

34 

> 

62 

ffl 

z 

90 

# 

35 

9 

63 

ffl 

91 

$ 

36 

B 

64 

B 

92 

APPENDIX  B 377 


SET  1 

SET  2 

POKE 

SET  1 

SET  2 

POKE 

SET  1 

SET  2 

POKE 

m 

93 

B 

8 

105 

E 

117 

B 

94 

□ 

106 

□ 

118 

a 

S 

95 

CB 

107 

□ 

119 

1 SPACE 

1 

96 

□ 

108 

H 

120 

E 

97 

□ 

109 

Q 

121 

H 

98 

H 

110 

□ 

v/ 

122 

n 

99 

□ 

111 

ED 

123 

□ 

100 

s 

112 

a 

124 

□ 

101 

H 

113 

□ 

125 

m 

102 

H 

114 

n 

126 

□ 

103 

31 

115 

s 

127 

s 

104 

D 

116 

Codes  from  128-255  are  reversed  images  of  codes  0-127. 


378 


APPENDIX  B 


APPENDIX  C 


ASCII  AND  CHR$  CODES 


This  appendix  shows  you  what  characters  will  appear  if  you  PRINT 
CHR$(X),  for  all  possible  values  of  X.  It  will  also  show  the  values  ob- 
tained by  typing  PRINT  ASC("x"),  where  x is  any  character  you  can  type. 
This  is  useful  in  evaluating  the  character  received  in  a GET  statement, 
converting  upper/lower  case,  and  printing  character  based  commands 
(like  switch  to  upper/lower  case)  that  could  not  be  enclosed  in  quotes. 


PRINTS  CHR$ 

PRINTS 

CHR$ 

PRINTS 

CHR$ 

PRINTS 

CHR$ 

0 

17 

a 

34 

3 

51 

1 

18 

# 

35 

4 

52 

2 

19 

$ 

36 

5 

53 

3 

fpiTj 

HIM 

20 

% 

37 

6 

54 

4 

21 

& 

38 

7 

55 

22 

• 

39 

8 

56 

6 

23 

( 

40 

9 

57 

7 

24 

) 

41 

58 

DISABLESg||§08 

25 

* 

42 

i 

59 

ENABLES  3 9 

26 

+ 

43 

<z 

60 

10 

27 

» 

44 

= 

61 

11 

28 

- 

45 

62 

12 

29 

46 

? 

63 

| RETURN  | 

30 

/ 

47 

@ 

64 

teiviimaiii  a a 

31 

0 

48 

A 

65 

15 

| SPACE  1 

32 

1 

49 

B 

66 

16 

1 ! 

33 

2 

50 

C 

67 

APPENDIX  C 


379 


PRINTS 

CHRS 

PRINTS 

CHRS 

PRINTS 

CHRS 

PRINTS 

CHRS 

H 

184 

□ 

186 

a 

188 

E 

190 

a 

185 

H 

187 

H 

189 

EB 

191 

CODES 

192-223 

SAME  AS 

96-127 

CODES 

224-254 

SAME  AS 

160-190 

CODE 

255 

SAME  AS 

126 

APPENDIX  C 


381 


APPENDIX  D 


SCREEN  AND  COLOR  MEMORY  MAPS 


The  following  charts  list  which  memory  locations  control  placing  char- 
acters on  the  screen,  and  the  locations  used  to  change  individual  char- 
acter colors,  as  well  as  showing  character  color  codes. 


SCREEN  MEMORY  MAP 


1024 

1064 

1104 

1144 

1184 

1224 

1264 

1304 

1344 

1384 

1424 

1464 

1504 

1544 

1584 

1624 

1664 

1704 

1744 

1784 

1824 

1864 

1904 

1944 

1984 


COLUMN 

0 10  20  30  39 


t 

2023 


382 


APPENDIX  D 


ROW 


The  actual  values  to  POKE  into  a color  memory  location  to  change  a 
character's  color  are: 


0 

BLACK 

8 

ORANGE 

1 

WHITE 

9 

BROWN 

2 

RED 

10 

Light  RED 

3 

CYAN 

1 1 

GRAY  1 

4 

PURPLE 

12 

GRAY  2 

5 

GREEN 

13 

Light  GREEN 

6 

BLUE 

14 

Light  BLUE 

7 

YELLOW 

15 

GRAY  3 

For  example,  to  change  the  color  of  a character  located  at  the  upper 
left-hand  corner  of  the  screen  to  red,  type:  POKE  55296,2. 


COLOR  MEMORY  MAP 

COLUMN 

0 10  20  30  39 


55335 

I 


APPENDIX  D 383 


I 


ROW 


APPENDIX  E 


MUSIC  NOTE  VALUES 


This  appendix  contains  a complete  list  of  Note#,  actual  note,  and  the 
values  to  be  POKEd  into  the  HI  FREQ  and  LOW  FREQ  registers  of  the 
sound  chip  to  produce  the  indicated  note. 


MUSICAL  NOTE 

OSCILLATOR  FREQ 

NOTE 

OCTAVE 

DECIMAL 

HI 

LOW 

0 

C-0 

268 

1 

12 

1 

C#-0 

284 

1 

28 

2 

D— 0 

301 

1 

45 

3 

D#— 0 

318 

1 

62 

4 

m 

1 

O 

337 

1 

81 

5 

~n 

1 

O 

358 

1 

102 

6 

F#— 0 

379 

1 

123 

7 

G-0 

401 

1 

145 

8 

G#-0 

425 

1 

169 

9 

A— 0 

451 

1 

195 

10 

A#-0 

477 

1 

221 

11 

B— 0 

506 

1 

250 

16 

C-l 

536 

2 

24 

17 

C#—  1 

568 

2 

56 

18 

D—  1 

602 

2 

90 

19 

D#-l 

637 

2 

125 

20 

E—  1 

675 

2 

163 

21 

F—  1 

716 

2 

204 

22 

F#—  1 

758 

2 

246 

23 

G- 1 

803 

3 

35 

24 

G#-l 

851 

3 

83 

25 

A—  1 

902 

3 

134 

26 

A#—  1 

955 

3 

187 

27 

B—  1 

1012 

3 

244 

32 

C— 2 

1072 

4 

48 

384  APPENDIX  E 


33 

34 

35 

36 

37 

38 

39 

40 

41 

42 

43 

48 

49 

50 

51 

52 

53 

54 

55 

56 

57 

58 

59 

64 

65 

66 

67 

68 

69 

70 

71 

72 

73 

74 

75 

80 

81 


NOTE 


OSCILLATOR  FREQ 


, OCTAVE 

DECIMAL 

HI 

LOW 

CN 

1 

% 

U 

1136 

4 

112 

D— 2 

1204 

4 

180 

D#— 2 

1275 

4 

251 

CN 

1 

LU 

1351 

5 

71 

F— 2 

1432 

5 

152 

F#-2 

1517 

5 

237 

G— 2 

1607 

6 

71 

G#-2 

1703 

6 

167 

A— 2 

1804 

7 

12 

A#— 2 

1911 

7 

119 

B— 2 

2025 

7 

233 

CO 

1 

U 

2145 

8 

97 

C#-3 

2273 

8 

225 

D— 3 

2408 

9 

104 

D#-3 

2551 

9 

247 

E— 3 

2703 

10 

143 

F— 3 

2864 

11 

48 

F#  — 3 

3034 

1 1 

218 

G— 3 

3215 

12 

143 

G#-3 

3406 

13 

78 

A- 3 

3608 

14 

24 

A#-3 

3823 

14 

239 

B— 3 

4050 

15 

210 

C— 4 

4291 

16 

195 

C #— 4 

4547 

17 

195 

D— 4 

4817 

18 

209 

D#  — 4 

5103 

19 

239 

m 

1 

4^ 

5407 

21 

31 

F— 4 

5728 

22 

96 

F#-4 

6069 

23 

181 

G— 4 

6430 

25 

30 

G#-4 

6812 

26 

156 

A— 4 

7217 

28 

49 

A#— 4 

7647 

29 

223 

B— 4 

8101 

31 

165 

C— 5 

8583 

33 

135 

C#-5 

9094 

35 

134 

APPENDIX  E 


385 


MUSICAL  NOTE 

OSCILLATOR  FREQ 

NOTE 

OCTAVE 

DECIMAL 

HI 

LOW 

82 

0—5 

9634 

37 

162 

83 

D#-5 

10207 

39 

223 

84 

E— 5 

10814 

42 

62 

85 

F— 5 

1 1457 

44 

193 

86 

F#-5 

12139 

47 

107 

87 

G— 5 

12860 

50 

60 

88 

G#-5 

13625 

53 

57 

89 

A— 5 

14435 

56 

99 

90 

A#— 5 

15294 

59 

190 

91 

B— 5 

16203 

63 

75 

96 

C— 6 

17167 

67 

15 

97 

C#-6 

18188 

71 

12 

98 

D— 6 

19269 

75 

69 

99 

D#-6 

20415 

79 

191 

100 

E— 6 

21629 

84 

125 

101 

F— 6 

22915 

89 

131 

102 

F#  — 6 

24278 

94 

214 

103 

G— 6 

25721 

100 

121 

104 

G#— 6 

27251 

106 

115 

105 

A— 6 

28871 

112 

199 

106 

A#— 6 

30588 

119 

124 

107 

B— 6 

32407 

126 

151 

112 

C— 7 

34334 

134 

30 

113 

C#-7 

36376 

142 

24 

114 

0—7 

38539 

150 

139 

115 

0#  — 7 

40830 

159 

126 

116 

E— 7 

43258 

168 

250 

117 

F— 7 

45830 

179 

6 

118 

F #— 7 

48556 

189 

172 

119 

G-7 

51443 

200 

243 

120 

G#-7 

54502 

212 

230 

121 

A- 7 

57743 

225 

143 

122 

A #-7 

61176 

238 

248 

123 

B— 7 

64814 

253 

46 

386  APPENDIX  E 


FILTER  SETTINGS 


Location 

Contents 

54293 

Low  cutoff  frequency  (0-7) 

54294 

High  cutoff  frequency  (0-255) 

54295 

Resonance  (bits  4—7) 

Filter  voice  3 (bit  2) 

Filter  voice  2 (bit  1) 

Filter  voice  1 (bit  0) 

54296 

High  pass  (bit  6) 

Bandpass  (bit  5) 

Low  pass  (bit  4) 

Volume  (bits  0-3) 

APPENDIX  E 387 


i 


APPENDIX  F 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Addison-Wesley 

"BASIC  and  the  Personal  Computer",  Dwyer 
and  Critchfield 

Compute 

"Compute's  First  Book  of  PET/CBM" 

Cowboy  Computing 

"Feed  Me,  I'm  Your  PET  Computer",  Carol  Al- 
exander 

"Looking  Good  with  Your  PET",  Carol  Alexan- 
der 

"Teacher's  PET  — Plans,  Quizzes,  and  An- 
swers" 

Creative  Computing 

"Getting  Acquainted  With  Your  VIC  20", 
T.  Hartnell 

Dilithium  Press 

"BASIC  Basic-English  Dictionary  for  the  PET", 
Larry  Noonan 

"PET  BASIC",  Tom  Rugg  and  Phil  Feldman 

Faulk  Baker  Associates 

"M OS  Programming  Manual",  MOS  Technol- 
ogy 

Hayden  Book  Co. 

"BASIC  From  the  Ground  Up",  David  E.  Simon 

"1  Speak  BASIC  to  My  PET",  Aubrey  Jones,  Jr. 

"Library  of  PET  Subroutines",  Nick  Hampshire 

"PET  Graphics",  Nick  Hampshire 

"BASIC  Conversions  Handbook,  Apple,  TRS- 
80,  and  PET",  David  A.  Brain,  Phillip  R. 
Oviatt,  Paul  J.  Paquin,  and  Chandler  P.  Stone 

388  APPENDIX  F 

Howard  W.  Sams 


Little,  Brown  & Co. 


McGraw-Hill 


Osborne/McGraw-Hill 


P.  C.  Publications 


"The  Howard  W.  Sams  Crash  Course  in  Mi- 
crocomputers", Louis  E.  Frenzel,  Jr. 

"Mostly  BASIC:  Applications  for  Your  PET", 
Howard  Berenbon 

"PET  Interfacing",  James  M.  Downey  and  Ste- 
ven M.  Rogers 

"VIC  20  Programmer's  Reference  Guide",  A. 
Finkel,  P.  Higginbottom,  N.  Harris,  and  M. 
Tomczyk 

"Computer  Games  for  Businesses,  Schools, 
and  Homes",  J.  Victor  Nagigian,  and  William 
S.  Hodges 

"The  Computer  Tutor:  Learning  Activities  for 
Homes  and  Schools",  Gary  W.  Orwig,  Univer- 
sity of  Central  Florida,  and  William  S.  Hodges 

"Hands-On  BASIC  With  a PET",  Herbert  D. 
Peckman 

"Home  and  Office  Use  of  VisiCalc",  D. 
Castlewitz,  and  L.  Chisauki 

"PET/CBM  Personal  Computer  Guide",  Carroll 
S.  Donahue 

"PET  Fun  and  Games",  R.  Jeffries  and  G. 
Fisher 

"PET  and  the  IEEE",  A.  Osborne  and  C. 
Donahue 

"Some  Common  BASIC  Programs  for  the  PET", 
L.  Poole,  M.  Borchers,  and  C.  Donahue 

"Osborne  CP/M  User  Guide",  Thom  Hogan 

"CBM  Professional  Computer  Guide" 

"The  PET  Personal  Guide" 

"The  8086  Book",  Russell  Rector  and  George 
Alexy 

"Beginning  Self-Teaching  Computer  Lessons" 


APPENDIX  F 389 


Prentice-Hall  "The  PET  Personal  Computer  for  Beginners", 

S.  Dunn  and  V.  Morgan 

Reston  Publishing  Co.  "PET  and  the  IEEE  488  Bus  (GPIB)",  Eugene 
Fisher  and  C.  W.  Jensen 


"PET  BASIC  — Training  Your  PET  Computer", 
Ramon  Zamora,  Wm.  F.  Carrie,  and  B. 
Allbrecht 

"PET  Games  and  Recreation",  M.  Ogelsby,  L. 
Lindsey,  and  D.  Kunkin 

"PET  BASIC",  Richard  Huskell 

"VIC  Games  and  Recreation" 

Telmas  Courseware  "BASIC  and  the  Personal  Computer",  T.  A. 

Ratings  Dwyer,  and  M.  Critchfield 

Total  Information  Ser-  "Understanding  Your  PET/CBM,  Vol.  1,  BASIC 

vices  Programming" 

"Understanding  Your  VIC",  David  Schultz 


Commodore  Magazines  provide  you  with  the  most  up-to-date  infor- 
mation for  your  Commodore  64.  Two  of  the  most  popular  publications 
that  you  should  seriously  consider  subscribing  to  are: 

COMMODORE — The  Microcomputer  Magazine  is  published  bi-monthly 
and  is  available  by  subscription  ($15.00  per  year,  U.S.,  and  $25.00  per 
year,  worldwide). 

POWER/PLAY—  The  Home  Computer  Magazine  is  published  quarterly 
and  is  available  by  subscription  ($10.00  per  year,  U.S.,  and  $15.00  per 
year  worldwide). 


390 


APPENDIX  F 


APPENDIX  G 


VIC  CHIP  REGISTER  MAP 


53248  ($D000)  Starting  (Base)  Address 


Register  # 
Dec  Hex 

DB7 

DB6 

DB5 

DB4 

DB3 

DB2 

DB1 

DBO 

0 

0 

S0X7 

SOXO 

SPRITE  0 X 

Component 

1 

1 

S0Y7 

i 

SOYO 

SPRITE  0 Y 
Component 

2 

2 

S1X7 

S1X0 

SPRITE  1 X 

3 

3 

S1Y7 

! 

SI  YO 

SPRITE  1 Y 

4 

4 

S2X7 

S2X0 

SPRITE  2 X 

5 

5 

'S2Y7 

S2Y0 

SPRITE  2 Y 

6 

6 

S3X7 

S3X0 

SPRITE  3 X 

7 

7 

S3Y7 

S3Y0 

SPRITE  3 Y 

8 

8 

S4X7 

S4X0 

SPRITE  4 X 

9 

9 

S4Y7 

S4Y0 

SPRITE  4 Y 

10 

A 

S5X7 

S5X0 

SPRITE  5 X 

11 

B 

S5Y7 

S5Y0 

SPRITE  5 Y 

12 

C 

S6X7 

S6X0 

SPRITE  6 X 

13 

D 

S6Y7 

S6Y0 

SPRITE  6 Y 

14 

E 

S7X7 

S7X0 

SPRITE  7 X 

Component 

15 

F 

S7Y7 

S7Y0 

SPRITE  7 Y 
Component 

16 

10 

S7X8 

S6X8 

S5X8 

S4X8 

S3X8 

S2X8 

S1X8 

S0X8 

MSB  of  X 

COORD. 

17 

11 

RC8 

ECM 

BMM 

BLNK 

RSEL 

YSCL2 

YSCL1 

YSCLO 

Y SCROLL 

MODE 

18 

12 

RC7 

RC6 

RC5 

RC4 

RC3 

RC2 

RC1 

RCO 

RASTER 

19 

13 

LPX7 

LPXO 

LIGHT  PEN  X 

20 

14 

LPY7 

LPYO 

LIGHT  PEN  Y 

APPENDIX  G 391 


r 


Register  # 

Dec  Hex 

DB7 

DB6 

DB5 

DB4 

DB3 

DB2 

DB1 

DBO 

21 

15 

SE7 

SEO 

SPRITE 

ENABLE 

(ON/OFF) 

22 

. 16 

N.C. 

N.C. 

RST 

MCM 

CSEL 

XSCL2 

XSCL1 

XSCLO 

X SCROLL 

MODE 

23 

17 

SEXY7 

SEXYO 

SPRITE 

EXPAND  Y 

24 

18 

VS1 3 

VS1 2 

VS11 

VS10 

CB13 

CB12 

CB1 1 

N.C. 

SCREEN  and 

Character 
Memory  Base 
Address 

25 

19 

IRQ 

N.C. 

N.C. 

N.C. 

LPIRQ 

ISSC 

ISBC 

RIRQ 

Interrupt 

Request's 

26 

1A 

N.C. 

N.C. 

N.C. 

N.C. 

MLPI 

MISSC 

MISBC 

MRIRQ 

Interrupt 

Request 

MASKS 

27 

IB 

BSP7 

BSPO 

Background- 

Sprite 

PRIORITY 

28 

1C 

SCM7 

SCMO 

MULTICOLOR 

SPRITE 

SELECT 

29 

ID 

SEXX7 

SEXXO 

SPRITE 

EXPAND  X 

30 

IE 

SSC7 

SSCO 

Sprite-Sprite 

COLLISION 

31 

IF 

SBC7 

SBCO 

Sprite- 

Background 

COLLISION 

392  APPENDIX  G 


Register  # 

Dec  Hex 

Color 

32 

20 

BORDER  COLOR 

33 

21 

BACKGROUND 

COLOR  0 

34 

22 

BACKGROUND 

COLOR  1 

35 

23 

BACKGROUND 

COLOR  2 

36 

24 

BACKGROUND 

COLOR  3 

37 

25 

SPRITE 

MULTICOLOR  0 

38 

SPRITE 

26 

MULTICOLOR  1 

Register  # 

Dec  Hex 

Color 

39 

27 

SPRITE  0 COLOR 

40 

28 

SPRITE  1 COLOR 

41 

29 

SPRITE  2 COLOR 

42 

2A 

SPRITE  3 COLOR 

43 

2B 

SPRITE  4 COLOR 

44 

2C 

SPRITE  5 COLOR 

45 

2D 

SPRITE  6 COLOR 

46 

2E 

SPRITE  7 COLOR 

COLOR  CODES 


Dec  Hex 

Color 

0 0 

BLACK 

1 1 

WHITE 

2 2 

RED 

3 3 

CYAN 

4 4 

PURPLE 

5 5 

GREEN 

6 6 

BLUE 

7 7 

YELLOW 

Dec 

Hex 

Col  or 

8 

8 

ORANGE 

9 

9 

BROWN 

10 

A 

LT  RED 

11 

B 

GRAY  1 

12 

C 

GRAY  2 

13 

D 

LT  GREEN 

14 

E 

LT  BLUE 

15 

F 

GRAY  3 

LEGEND: 

ONLY  COLORS  0-7  MAY  BE  USED  IN  MULTICOLOR  CHARACTER  MODE 


APPENDIX  G 393 


r 


APPENDIX  H 


DERIVING  MATHEMATICAL  FUNCTIONS 

Functions  that  are  not  intrinsic  to  Commodore  64  BASIC  may  be  calcu- 
lated as  follows: 


FUNCTION 

BASIC  EQUIVALENT 

SECANT 

COSECANT 

COTANGENT 

INVERSE  SINE 

INVERSE  COSINE 

SEC(X)=l/COS(X) 

CSC(X)=  l/SIN(X) 

COT(X)=  l/TAN(X) 

ARCSIN(X)=ATN(X/SQR(— X*X+ 1 )) 
ARCCOS(X)=  — ATN(X/SQR 
(-X*X  +1))  +tt/2 

INVERSE  SECANT 

INVERSE  COSECANT 

ARCSEC(X)=ATN(X/SQR(X*X—  1 )) 
ARCCSC(X)= ATN(X/SQR(X*X  — 1 )) 

+ (SGN(X)—  1 *7t/2 

INVERSE  COTANGENT 

HYPERBOLIC  SINE 

HYPERBOLIC  COSINE 

HYPERBOLIC  TANGENT 

ARCOT(X)=ATN(X)+tt/2 

SINH(X)=(EXP(X)-EXP(-X))/2 

COSH(X)=  (EXP(X)+  EXP(— X))/2 

TANH(X)=  EXP(— X)/(EXP(x)+  EXP 
(— X))*2+ 1 

HYPERBOLIC  SECANT 

HYPERBOLIC  COSECANT 

HYPERBOLIC  COTANGENT 

SECH(X)=2/(EXP(X)+EXP(— X)) 
CSCH(X)=2/(EXP(X)— EXP(— X)) 

COTH(X)=  EXP(—  X)/(EXP(X) 

— EXP(— X))*2+ 1 

INVERSE  HYPERBOLIC  SINE 

INVERSE  HYPERBOLIC  COSINE 

INVERSE  HYPERBOLIC  TANGENT 

INVERSE  HYPERBOLIC  SECANT 

ARCSINH(X)=  LOG(X  + SQR(X*X  + 1 )) 
ARCCOSH(X)=  LOG(X+SQR(X*X—  1 )) 
ARCTAN  H(X)=  LOG((  1 + X)/(  1 - X))/2 
ARCSECH(X)=  LOG((SQR 
(-X*X+l)+l/X) 

INVERSE  HYPERBOLIC  COSECANT 

ARCCSCH(X)=  LOG((SGN(X)*SQR 
(X*X+  l/x) 

INVERSE  HYPERBOLIC  COTAN- 
GENT 

ARCCOTH(X)=  LOG((X+  1 )/( X - 1 ))/2 

394  APPENDIX  H 


APPENDIX  I 


PINOUTS  FOR  INPUT/OUTPUT  DEVICES 


This  appendix  is  designed  to  show  you  what  connections  may  be 
made  to  the  Commodore  64. 


1)  Game  I/O  4)  Serial  I/O  (Disk/Printer) 

2)  Cartridge  Slot  5)  Modulator  Output 

3)  Audio/Video  6)  Cassette 

7)  User  Port 


Control  Port  1 


Pin 

Type 

Note 

1 

JOYAO 

2 

JOYA1 

3 

JOYA2 

4 

JOYA3 

5 

POT  AY 

6 

BUTTON  A/LP 

7 

+ 5V 

MAX.  50mA 

8 

GND 

9 

POT  AX 

Control  Port  2 


Pin 

Type 

Note 

1 

JOYBO 

2 

JOYB1 

3 

JOYB2 

4 

JOYB3 

5 

POT  BY 

6 

BUTTON  B 

7 

.+5V 

MAX.  50mA 

8 

GND 

9 

POT  BX 

APPENDIX  I 


395 


Cartridge  Expansion  Slot 


Pin 

Type 

1 

GND 

2 

+5V 

3 

+ 5V 

4 

IRQ 

5 

R/W 

6 

Dot  Clock 

7 

I/O  1 

8 

GAME 

9 

EXROM 

10 

I/O  2 

1 1 

ROML 

Pin 

Type 

12 

BA 

13 

DMA 

14 

07 

15 

D6 

16 

D5 

17 

D4 

18 

D3 

19 

D2 

20 

D1 

21 

DO 

22 

GND 

Pin 

Type 

A 

GND 

B 

ROMH 

C 

RESET 

D 

NMI 

E 

S 02 

F 

A15 

H 

A14 

J 

A13 

K 

A12 

L 

All 

M 

A10 

Pin 

Type 

N 

A9 

P 

A8 

R 

A7 

S 

A6 

T 

A5 

U 

A4 

V 

A3 

w 

A2 

X 

A1 

Y 

A0 

z 

GND 

22  21  20  1918  17  16  15  14  13  12  11  10  9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 


ZYXWVUTSRPNMLKJHFEDCBA 


Audio/Video 


Pin 

Type 

Note 

1 

LUMINANCE 

2 

GND 

3 

AUDIO  OUT 

4 

VIDEO  OUT 

5 

AUDIO  IN 

Serial  I/O 


Pin 

Type 

1 

SERIAL  SRQIN 

2 

GND 

3 

SERIAL  ATN  IN/OUT 

4 

SERIAL  CLK  IN/OUT 

5 

SERIAL  DATA  IN/OUT 

6 

RESET 

396 


APPENDIX 


Cassette 


Pin 

Type 

A-l 

GND 

B-2 

+ 5V 

C-3 

CASSETTE  MOTOR 

D-4 

CASSETTE  READ 

E-5 

CASSETTE  WRITE 

F-6 

CASSETTE  SENSE 

User  I/O 


Pin 

Type 

Note 

1 

GND 

2 

+ 5V 

MAX.  100  mA 

3 

RESET 

4 

CNT1 

5 

SP1 

6 

CNT2 

7 

SP2 

8 

PC2 

9 

SER.  ATN  IN 

10 

9 VAC 

MAX.  100  mA 

1 1 

9 VAC 

MAX.  100  mA 

12 

GND 

Pin 

Type 

Note 

A 

GND 

B 

FLAG2 

C 

PBO 

D 

PB1 

E 

PB2 

F 

PB3 

H 

PB4 

J 

PB5 

K 

PB6 

L 

PB7 

M 

PA2 

N 

GND 

1 2 

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

10  11  12 

ABCDEFHJ  K L M N 


APPENDIX  I 397 


T 


APPENDIX  J 


CONVERTING  STANDARD 
BASIC  PROGRAMS  TO 
COMMODORE  64  BASIC 


If  you  have  programs  written  in  a BASIC  other  than  Commodore 
BASIC,  some  minor  adjustments  may  be  necessary  before  running  them 
on  the  Commodore-64.  We've  included  some  hints  to  make  the  conver- 
sion easier. 


String  Dimensions 

Delete  all  statements  that  are  used  to  declare  the  length  of  strings.  A 
statement  such  as  DIM  A$(l/J)/  which  dimensions  a string  array  for  J 
elements  of  length  I,  should  be  converted  to  the  Commodore  BASIC 
statement  DIM  A$(J). 

Some  BASICs  use  a comma  or  an  ampersand  for  string  concatenation. 
Each  of  these  must  be  changed  to  a plus  sign,  which  is  the  Commodore 
BASIC  operator  for  string  concatenation. 

In  Commodore-64  BASIC,  the  MID$,  RIGHTS,  and  LEFTS  functions  are 
used  to  take  substrings  of  strings.  Forms  such  as  A$(l)  to  access  the  Ith 
character  in  A$,  or  A$(I,J)  to  take  a substring  of  A$  from  position  I to  J, 
must  be  changed  as  follows: 


Other  BASIC  Commodore  64  BASIC 

A$(l)  = X$  AS  = LEFT$(A$,I-1)+X$  + MID$(A$,I+1) 

A$(I,J)  = X$  AS  = LEFT$(A$,I—  1 )+X$  + MID$(A$,J+ 1 ) 


Multiple  Assignments 

To  set  B and  C equal  to  zero,  some  BASICs  allow  statements  of  the 
form: 

10  LET  B = C = 0 

398  APPENDIX  J 


■I 


Commodore  64  BASIC  would  interpret  the  second  equal  sign  as  a 
logical  operator  and  set  B = —1  if  C = 0.  Instead,  convert  this  state- 
ment to: 


10  C = 0 : B = 0 

Multiple  Statements 

Some  BASICs  use  a backslash  (\  ) to  separate  multiple  statements  on 
a line.  With  Commodore  64  BASIC,  separate  all  statements  by  a colon 

0). 

MAT  Functions 

Programs  using  the  MAT  functions  available  on  some  BASICs  must  be 
rewritten  using  FOR.  . .NEXT  loops  to  execute  properly. 


APPENDIX  J 399 


~r 


APPENDIX  K 


ERROR  MESSAGES 


This  appendix  contains  a complete  list  of  the  error  messages  gener- 
ated by  the  Commodore-64,  with  a description  of  causes. 


BAD  DATA  String  data  was  received  from  an  open  file,  but  the  pro- 
gram was  expecting  numeric  data. 

BAD  SUBSCRIPT  The  program  was  trying  to  reference  an  element  of 
an  array  whose  number  is  outside  of  the  range  specified  in  the  DIM 
statement. 


BREAK  Program  execution  was  stopped  because  you  hit  the  I 

CAN'T  CONTINUE  The  CONT  command  will  not  work,  either  because 
the  program  was  never  RUN,  there  has  been  an  error,  or  a line  has 
been  edited. 

DEVICE  NOT  PRESENT  The  required  I/O  device  was  not  available  for 
an  OPEN,  CLOSE,  CMD,  PRINT#,  INPUT#,  or  GET#. 

DIVISION  BY  ZERO  Division  by  zero  is  a mathematical  oddity  and  not 
allowed. 

EXTRA  IGNORED  Too  many  items  of  data  were  typed  in  response  to 
an  INPUT  statement.  Only  the  first  few  items  were  accepted. 

FILE  NOT  FOUND  If  you  were  looking  for  a file  on  tape,  and  END-OF- 
TAPE  marker  was  found.  If  you  were  looking  on  disk,  no  file  with  that 
name  exists. 


FILE  NOT  OPEN  The  file  specified  in  a CLOSE,  CMD,  PRINT#,  INPUT#, 
or  GET#,  must  first  be  OPENed. 

FILE  OPEN  An  attempt  was  made  to  open  a file  using  the  number  of 
an  already  open  file. 

FORMULA  TOO  COMPLEX  The  string  expression  being  evaluated 
should  be  split  into  at  least  two  parts  for  the  system  to  work  with,  or  a 
formula  has  too  many  parentheses. 

ILLEGAL  DIRECT  The  INPUT  statement  can  only  be  used  within  a pro- 
gram, and  not  in  direct  mode. 

ILLEGAL  QUANTITY  A number  used  as  the  argument  of  a function  or 
statement  is  out  of  the  allowable  range. 


400  APPENDIX  K 


LOAD  There  is  a problem  with  the  program  on  tape. 

NEXT  WITHOUT  FOR  This  is  caused  by  either  incorrectly  nesting  loops 
or  having  a variable  name  in  a NEXT  statement  that  doesn't  correspond 
with  one  in  a FOR  statement. 

NOT  INPUT  FILE  An  attempt  was  made  to  INPUT  or  GET  data  from  a 
file  which  was  specified  to  be  for  output  only. 

NOT  OUTPUT  FILE  An  attempt  was  made  to  PRINT  data  to  a file  which 
was  specified  as  input  only. 

OUT  OF  DATA  A READ  statement  was  executed  but  there  is  no  data 
left  unREAD  in  a DATA  statement. 

OUT  OF  MEMORY  There  is  no  more  RAM  available  for  program  or 
variables.  This  may  also  occur  when  too  many  FOR  loops  have  been 
nested,  or  when  there  are  too  many  GOSUBs  in  effect. 

OVERFLOW  The  result  of  a computation  is  larger  than  the  largest 
number  allowed,  which  is  1 .701 41  884E+38. 

REDIM'D  ARRAY  An  array  may  only  be  DIMensioned  once.  If  an  array 
variable  is  used  before  that  array  is  DIM'd,  an  automatic  DIM  operation 
is  performed  on  that  array  setting  the  number  of  elements  to  ten,  and 
any  subsequent  DIMs  will  cause  this  error. 

REDO  FROM  START  Character  data  was  typed  in  during  an  INPUT 
statement  when  numeric  data  was  expected.  Just  re-type  the  entry  so 
that  it  is  correct,  and  the  program  will  continue  by  itself. 

RETURN  WITHOUT  GOSUB  A RETURN  statement  was  encountered, 
and  no  GOSUB  command  has  been  issued. 

STRING  TOO  LONG  A string  can  contain  up  to  255  characters. 
7SYNTAX  ERROR  A statement  is  unrecognizable  by  the  Commodore 
64.  A missing  or  extra  parenthesis,  misspelled  keywords,  etc. 

TYPE  MISMATCH  This  error  occurs  when  a number  is  used  in  place  of  a 
string,  or  vice-versa. 

UNDEF'D  FUNCTION  A user  defined  function  was  referenced,  but  it 
has  never  been  defined  using  the  DEF  FN  statement. 

UNDEF'D  STATEMENT  An  attempt  was  made  to  GOTO  or  GOSUB  or 
RUN  a line  number  that  doesn't  exist. 

VERIFY  The  program  on  tape  or  disk  does  not  match  the  program  cur- 
rently in  memory. 


APPENDIX  K 


401 


APPENDIX  L 


6510  MICROPROCESSOR  CHIP 
SPECIFICATIONS 

DESCRIPTION 

The  6510  is  a low-cost  microcomputer  system  capable  of  solving  a 
broad  range  of  small-systems  and  peripheral-control  problems  at 
minimum  cost  to  the  user. 

An  8-bit  Bi-Directional  I/O  Port  is  located  on-chip  with  the  Output  Reg- 
ister at  Address  0000  and  the  Data-Direction  Register  at  Address  0001. 
The  I/O  Port  is  bit-by-bit  programmable. 

The  Three-State  sixteen-bit  Address  Bus  allows  Direct  Memory  Access- 
ing (DMA)  and  multiprocessor  systems  sharing  a common  memory. 

The  internal  processor  architecture  is  identical  to  the  M OS  Technology 
6502  to  provide  software  compatibility. 

FEATURES  OF  THE  6510  . . . 


• Eight-Bit  Bi-Directional  I/O  Port 

• Single  + 5-volt  supply 

• N-channel,  silicon  gate,  depletion  load  technology 

• Eight-bit  parallel  processing 

• 56  Instructions 

• Decimal  and  binary  arithmetic 

• Thirteen  addressing  modes 

• True  indexing  capability 

• Programmable  stack  pointer 

• Variable  length  stack 

• Interrupt  capability 

• Eight-Bit  Bi-Directional  Data  Bus 

• Addressable  memory  range  of  up  to  65K  bytes 

• Direct  memory  access  capability 

• Bus  compatible  with  M6800 

• Pipeline  architecture 

• 1-MHz  and  2-MHz  operation 

• Use  with  any  type  or  speed  memory 


402  APPENDIX  L 


PIN  CONFIGURATION 


O' 

0-,  IN 

1 

40 

RES 

RDY 

2 

39 

02  IN 

IRQ 

3 

38 

R/W 

NMl 

4 

37 

DB0 

AEC 

5 

36 

DB-, 

VCC 

6 

35 

db2 

A0 

7 

34 

db3 

Ai 

8 

33 

db4 

a2 

9 

6510 

32 

db5 

A3 

10 

31 

db6 

A4 

11 

30 

db7 

A5 

12 

29 

Po 

A6 

13 

28 

Pi 

A7 

14 

27 

p2 

A8 

15 

26 

p3 

A9 

16 

25 

p4 

A10 

17 

24 

p5 

A11 

18 

23 

A15 

A12 

19 

22 

A14 

A13 

20 

21 

GND 

APPENDIX  L 


6510  BLOCK  DIAGRAM 


404  APPENDIX  L 


~T 


6510  CHARACTERISTICS 


MAXIMUM  RATINGS 


RATING 

SYMBOL 

VALUE 

UNIT 

SUPPLY  VOLTAGE 

< 

o 

o 

-0.3  to  +7.0 

Vdc 

INPUT  VOLTAGE 

Vin 

-0.3  to  +7.0 

Vdc 

OPERATING  TEMPERATURE 

Ta 

0 to  +70 

°c 

STORAGE  TEMPERATURE 

Tstg 

-55  to  +150 

°c 

NOTE:  This  device  contains  input  protection  against  damage  due  to  high  static  volt- 
ages or  electric  fields;  however,  precautions  should  be  taken  to  avoid  application  of 
voltages  higher  than  the  maximum  rating. 


ELECTRICAL  CHARACTERISTICS 

(VCC  = 5.0  V ±5%,  VSS  = 0,  TA  = 0°  to  +70°C) 


CHARACTERISTIC 

SYM- 

BOL 

MIN. 

TYP. 

MAX. 

UNIT 

Input  High  Voltage 

01/  02 Un) 

Input  High  Voltage 

RES,  P0-P7  IRQ,  Data 

V,H 

Vcc  - 0.2 

Vss  + 2.0 

— 

Vcc  + 1.0V 

< < 

o a 

o o 

Input  Low  Voltage 

01/  02 On) 

RES,  P0-P7  IRQ/  Data 

V,L 

Vss  “ 0.3 

— 

Vss  + 0.2 
Vss  + 0.8 

< < 

D O 

O O 

Input  Leakage  Current 

(Vin  = 0 to  5.25V,  Vcc  = 5.25V) 
Logic 

01/  02 Un) 

1 in 

— 

— 

2.5 

100 

< < 
3.  ^ 

Three  State  (Off  State)  Input  Current 
(Vjn  = 0.4  to  2.4V,  Vcc  = 5.25V) 

Data  Lines 

Itsi 

10 

/jlA 

Output  High  Voltage 
(Ioh  = — 1 00/xADc,  Vcc  = 4.75V) 
Data,  A0-A15,  R/W,  P0-P7 

V0H 

Vss  + 2.4 

Vdc 

APPENDIX  L 405 


CHARACTERISTIC 

SYM- 

BOL 

MIN. 

TYP. 

MAX. 

UNIT 

Out  Low  Voltage 
(Iol  = 1.6mA0C,  Vcc  = 4.75V) 

Data,  A0-A1 5,  R/W,  P0-P7 

d 

> 

— 

— 

Vss  + 0.4 

o 

o 

> 

Power  Supply  Current 

•cc 

— 

125 

mA 

Capacitance 

c 

PF 

Vin  = 0,  Ta  = 25°C,  f = 1 MHz) 

Logic,  P0-P7 

Cm 

— 

— 

10 

Data 

— 



15 

A0-A15,  R/W 

Cout 

— 

— 

12 

0i 

C01 

— 

30 

50 

02 

C<t>  2 

— 

50 

80 

. 

406  APPENDIX  L 


6510  SYSTEM  TIMING 


T 


APPENDIX  L 


407 


AC  CHARACTERISTICS 


ELECTRICAL  CHARACTERISTICS 

(VCC  = 5V  ± 5%,  VSS  = OV,  Ta  = 0°  -70°C) 

CLOCK  TIMING 


CHARACTERISTIC 

SYMBOL 

MIN. 

TYP. 

MAX. 

Cycle  Time 

Tcyc 

1000 

— 

— 

Clock  Pulse  Width  </>l 

PWH01 

430 

— 



(Measured  at  VC C-0.2V)$2 

PWH<£2 

470 

— 

— 

Fall  Time,  Rise  Time 

(Measured  from  0.2V  to  VCC-0.2V) 

Tf / Tr 

25 

Delay  Time  between  Clocks 
(Measured  from  0.2V 

Td 

0 

408  APPENDIX  L 


T 


READ/WRITE  TIMING  (LOAD  = 1TTL) 


CHARACTERISTIC 

SYMBOL 

MIN. 

TYP. 

MAX. 

Read/Write  Setup  Time 

Trws 

— 

100 

150 

Address  Setup  Time 

Tads 

— 

100 

150 

Memory  Read  Access  Time 

Tacc 

— 

— 

300 

Data  Stability  Time  Period 

Tdsu 

60 

— 

— 

Data  Hold  Time-Read 

Thr 

10 

— 

— 

Data  Hold  Time-Write 

Thw 

10 

30 

— 

Data  Setup  Time 

Tmds 

— 

— 

100 

Address  Hold  Time 

Tha 

10 

30 

— 

R/W  Hold  Time 

Thrw 

10 

30 

— 

Delay  Time,  (f)2  negative  transition 
to  Peripheral  Data  valid 

TpDW 

300 

Peripheral  Data  Setup  Time 

TpDSU 

150 

— 

— 

Address  Enable  Setup  Time 

Taes 

75 

Address  Disable  *See  Note  1 

Taed 

120 

Data  Enable  Setup  Time 

Tdes 

120 

Data  Disable  *See  Note  1 

Tded 

130 

*Note  1-1TTL  Load 
CL  = 30  pf 


APPENDIX  L 409 


_r 


SIGNAL  DESCRIPTION 

Clocks  (</>„  </>2) 

The  6510  requires  a two-phase  non-overlapping  clock  that  runs  at  the 
Vcc  voltage  level. 

Address  Bus  (A0-A15) 

These  outputs  are  TTL  compatible,  capable  of  driving  one  standard 
TTL  load  and  130  pf. 

Data  Bus  (D0-D7) 

Eight  pins  are  used  for  the  data  bus.  This  is  a Bi-Directional  bus, 
transferring  data  to  and  from  the  device  and  peripherals.  The  outputs  are 
tri-state  buffers  capable  of  driving  one  standard  TTL  load  and  130  pf. 

Reset 

This  input  is  used  to  reset  or  start  the  microprocessor  from  a power 
down  condition.  During  the  time  that  this  line  is  held  low,  writing  to  or 
from  the  microprocessor  is  inhibited.  When  a positive  edge  is  detected 
on  the  input,  the  microprocessor  will  immediately  begin  the  reset 
sequence. 

After  a system  initialization  time  of  six  clock  cycles,  the  mask  interrupt 
flag  will  be  set  and  the  microprocessor  will  load  the  program  counter 
from  the  memory  vector  locations  FFFC  and  FFFD.  This  is  the  start  loca- 
tion for  program  control. 

After  Vcc  reaches  4.75  volts  in  a power-up  routine,  reset  must  be  held 
low  for  at  least  two  clock  cycles.  At  this  time  the  R/W  signal  will  become 
valid. 

When  the  reset  signal  goes  high  following  these  two  clock  cycles,  the 
microprocessor  will  proceed  with  the  normal  reset  procedure  detailed 
above. 

Interrupt  Request  (IRQ) 

This  TTL  level  input  requests  that  an  interrupt  sequence  begin  within 
the  microprocessor.  The  microprocessor  will  complete  the  current  in- 
struction being  executed  before  recognizing  the  request.  At  that  time, 
the  interrupt  mask  bit  in  the  Status  Code  Register  will  be  examined.  If 
the  interrupt  mask  flag  is  not  set,  the  microprocessor  will  begin  an  inter- 
rupt sequence.  The  Program  Counter  and  Processor  Status  Register  are 
stored  in  the  stack.  The  microprocessor  will  then  set  the  interrupt  mask 


410  APPENDIX  L 


flag  high  so  that  no  further  interrupts  may  occur.  At  the  end  of  this 
cycle,  the  program  counter  low  will  be  loaded  from  address  FFFE,  and 
program  counter  high  from  location  FFFF,  therefore  transferring  pro- 
gram control  to  the  memory  vector  located  at  these  addresses. 

Address  Enable  Control  (AEC) 

The  Address  Bus  is  valid  only  when  the  Address  Enable  Control  line  is 
high.  When  low,  the  Address  Bus  is  in  a high-impedance  state.  This 
feature  allows  easy  DMA  and  multiprocessor  systems. 

I/O  Port  (P0-P5) 

Six  pins  are  used  for  the  peripheral  port,  which  can  transfer  data  to 
or  from  peripheral  devices.  The  Output  Register  is  located  in  RAM  at 
Address  0001,  and  the  Data  Direction  Register  is  at  Address  0000.  The 
outputs  are  capable  at  driving  one  standard  TTL  load  and  130  pf. 


NOTE:  p6  js  used  for  NMI  (non-maskable  interrupt). 
P7  is  used  for  RDY  (ready). 


Read/Write  (R/W) 

This  signal  is  generated  by  the  microprocessor  to  control  the  direction 
of  data  transfers  on  the  Data  Bus.  This  line  is  high  except  when  the 
microprocessor  is  writing  to  memory  or  a peripheral  device. 

ADDRESSING  MODES 

ACCUMULATOR  ADDRESSING—  This  form  of  addressing  is  represented 
with  a one  byte  instruction,  implying  an  operation  on  the  accumulator. 

IMMEDIATE  ADDRESSING — |n  immediate  addressing,  the  operand  is 
contained  in  the  second  byte  of  the  instruction,  with  no  further  memory 
addressing  required. 

ABSOLUTE  ADDRESSING — |n  absolute  addressing,  the  second  byte  of 
the  instruction  specifies  the  eight  low  order  bits  of  the  effective  address 
while  the  third  byte  specifies  the  eight  high  order  bits.  Thus,  the  absolute 
addressing  mode  allows  access  to  the  entire  65K  bytes  of  addressable 
memory. 


APPENDIX  L 411 


_r 


ZERO  PAGE  ADDRESSING — The  zero  page  instructions  allow  for  shorter 
code  and  execution  times  by  only  fetching  the  second  byte  of  the  in- 
struction and  assuming  a zero  high  address  byte.  Careful  use  of  the 
zero  page  can  result  in  significant  increase  in  code  efficiency. 

INDEXED  ZERO  PAGE  ADDRESSING — (X,  Y indexing)— This  form  of 
addressing  is  used  in  conjunction  with  the  index  register  and  is  referred 
to  as  " Zero  Page,  X " or  "Zero  Page,  Y ."  The  effective  address  is  calcu- 
lated by  adding  the  second  byte  to  the  contents  of  the  index  register. 
Since  this  is  a form  of  "Zero  Page"  addressing,  the  content  of  the  sec- 
ond byte  references  a location  in  page  zero.  Additonally,  due  to  the 
"Zero  Page"  addressing  nature  of  this  mode,  no  carry  is  added  to  the 
high  order  8 bits  of  memory  and  crossing  of  page  boundaries  does  not 
occur. 

INDEXED  ABSOLUTE  ADDRESSING  — (X,  Y indexing)— This  form  of 
addressing  is  used  in  conjunction  with  X and  Y index  register  and  is 
referred  to  as  "Absolute,  X,"  and  "Absolute,  Y ."  The  effective  address  is 
formed  by  adding  the  contents  of  X and  Y to  the  address  contained  in 
the  second  and  third  bytes  of  the  instruction.  This  mode  allows  the  index 
register  to  contain  the  index  or  count  value  and  the  instruction  to  contain 
the  base  address.  This  type  of  indexing  allows  any  location  referencing 
and  the  index  to  modify  multiple  fields  resulting  in  reduced  coding  and 
execution  time. 

IMPLIED  ADDRESSING  In  the  implied  addressing  mode,  the  address 
containing  the  operand  is  implicitly  stated  in  the  operation  code  of  the 
instruction. 

RELATIVE  ADDRESSING — Relative  addressing  is  used  only  with  branch 
instructions  and  establishes  a destination  for  the  conditional  branch. 

The  second  byte  of  the  instruction  becomes  the  operand  which  is  an 
"Offset"  added  to  the  contents  of  the  lower  eight  bits  of  the  program 
counter  when  the  counter  is  set  at  the  next  instruction.  The  range  of  the 
offset  is  —128  to  +127  bytes  from  the  next  instruction. 

INDEXED  INDIRECT  ADDRESSING  In  indexed  indirect  addressing  (re- 
ferred to  as  [Indirect,  X]),  the  second  byte  of  the  instruction  is  added  to 
the  contents  of  the  X index  register,  discarding  the  carry.  The  result  of 
this  addition  points  to  a memory  location  on  page  zero  whose  contents  is 
the  low  order  eight  bits  of  the  effective  address.  The  next  memory  loca- 
tion in  page  zero  contains  the  high  order  eight  bits  of  the  effective  ad- 
dress. Both  memory  locations  specifying  the  high  and  low  order  bytes  of 
the  effective  address  must  be  in  page  zero. 


412  APPENDIX  L 


INDIRECT  INDEXED  ADDRESSING  — In  indirect  indexed  addressing  (re- 
ferred to  as  [Indirect],  Y),  the  second  byte  of  the  instruction  points  to  a 
memory  location  in  page  zero.  The  contents  of  this  memory  location  is 
added  to  the  contents  of  the  Y index  register,  the  result  being  the  low 
order  eight  bits  of  the  effective  address.  The  carry  from  this  addition  is 
added  to  the  contents  of  the  next  page  zero  memory  location,  the  result 
being  the  high  order  eight  bits  of  the  effective  address. 

ABSOLUTE  INDIRECT-  The  second  byte  of  the  instruction  contains  the 
low  order  eight  bits  of  a memory  location.  The  high  order  eight  bits  of 
that  memory  location  is  contained  in  the  third  byte  of  the  instruction.  The 
contents  of  the  fully  specified  memory  location  is  the  low  order  byte  of 
the  effective  address.  The  next  memory  location  contains  the  high  order 
byte  of  the  effective  address  which  is  loaded  into  the  sixteen  bits  of  the 
program  counter. 

INSTRUCTION  SET— ALPHABETIC 
SEQUENCE 

ADC  Add  Memory  to  Accumulator  with  Carry 

AND  "AND"  Memory  with  Accumulator 

ASL  Shift  Left  One  Bit  (Memory  or  Accumulator) 

BCC  Branch  on  Carry  Clear 

BCS  Branch  on  Carry  Set 

BEQ  Branch  on  Result  Zero 

BIT  Test  Bits  in  Memory  with  Accumulator 

BMI  Branch  on  Result  Minus 

BNE  Branch  on  Result  not  Zero 

BPL  Branch  on  Result  Plus 

BRK  Force  Break 

BVC  Branch  on  Overflow  Clear 

BVS  Branch  on  Overflow  Set 

CLC  Clear  Carry  Flag 

CLD  Clear  Decimal  Mode 

CLI  Clear  Interrupt  Disable  Bit 

CLV  Clear  Overflow  Flag 

CMP  Compare  Memory  and  Accumulator 

CPX  Compare  Memory  and  Index  X 

CPY  Compare  Memory  and  Index  Y 


APPENDIX  L 413 


i 


DEC  Decrement  Memory  by  One 

DEX  Decrement  Index  X by  One 

DEY  Decrement  Index  Y by  One 

EOR  "Exclusive-OR"  Memory  with  Accumulator 

INC  Increment  Memory  by  One 

INX  Increment  Index  X by  One 

INY  Increment  Index  Y by  One 

JMP  Jump  to  New  Location 

JSR  Jump  to  New  Location  Saving  Return  Address 

LDA  Load  Accumulator  with  Memory 

LDX  Load  Index  X with  Memory 

LDY  Load  Index  Y with  Memory 

LSR  Shift  One  Bit  Right  (Memory  or  Accumulator) 

NOP  No  Operation 

ORA  "OR"  Memory  with  Accumulator 

PHA  Push  Accumulator  on  Stack 

PHP  Push  Processor  Status  on  Stack 
PLA  Pull  Accumulator  from  Stack 

PLP  Pull  Processor  Status  from  Stack 

ROL  Rotate  One  Bit  Left  (Memory  or  Accumulator) 
ROR  Rotate  One  Bit  Right  (Memory  or  Accumulator) 
RTI  Return  from  Interrupt 

RTS  Return  from  Subroutine 

SBC  Subtract  Memory  from  Accumulator  with  Borrow 

SEC  Set  Carry  Flag 

SED  Set  Decimal  Mode 

SEI  Set  Interrupt  Disable  Status 

STA  Store  Accumulator  in  Memory 

STX  Store  Index  X in  Memory 

STY  Store  Index  Y in  Memory 


414 


APPENDIX  L 


TAX  Transfer  Accumulator  to  Index  X 

TAY  Transfer  Accumulator  to  Index  Y 

TSX  Transfer  Stack  Pointer  to  Index  X 

TXA  Transfer  Index  X to  Accumulator 

TXS  Transfer  Index  X to  Stack  Register 

TYA  Transfer  Index  Y to  Accumulator 


PROGRAMMING  MODEL 


15 


PCH 


ACCUMULATOR 
INDEX  REGISTER 
INDEX  REGISTER 


A 

Y 

X 


PCI- 


PROGRAM  COUNTER  “PC” 


8 7 


111 


STACK  POINTER 


“S” 


7 0 

| N 1 V 1 | B 1 D 1 1 1 1 ZTCI  PROCESSOR  STATUS  REG  ”P” 


_►  CARRY  1 = TRUE 

-►ZERO  1 = RESULT  ZERO 

-►  IRQ  DISABLE  1 = DISABLE 

-►  DECIMAL  MODE  1 = TRUE 
“►  BRK  COMMAND 


-►OVERFLOW 
-►  NEGATIVE 


1 = TRUE 
1 = NEG 


APPENDIX  L 


415 


INSTRUCTION  SET— OP  CODES,  EXECUTION 


LU 

Q 

O 

o 

z 

o 

H 

Q 

Z 

o 

o 

> 

Q 

O 

M 

Z 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

CO 

2 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

0 

1 

1 

1 

o 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

o 

1 

1 

1 

o 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

Z,  Page,  Y 

* 

z 

CL 

O 

1 Indirect  1 

* 

co 

z 

in 

CL 

o 

o 

co 

1 Relative 

* 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

z 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

0. 

o 

§ 

O 

CD 

o 

LL 

O 

CO 

o 

o 

o 

o 

in 

£ 

> 

.a 

< 

* 

CO 

co 

CO 

CO 

co 

z 

CL 

O 

a 

05 

co 

05 

a 

CD 

m 

05 

X 

X 

-o 

< 

* 

co 

CO 

co 

CO 

co 

co 

co 

CO 

z 

TT 

r- 

r^. 

0. 

o 

Q 

r- 

Q 

CO 

a 

o 

UJ 

Q 

Q 

m 

UJ 

X 

Q 

CD 

z.  Page.  X| 

* 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

z 

CO 

CO 

co 

Q_ 

o 

in 

in 

CO 

CO 

in 

Q 

co 

o 

in 

m 

co 

X 

in 

CD 

> 

-d 

c 

* 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

z 

in 

in 

in 

m 

m 

0- 

o 

£ 

co 

5 

in 

5 

X 

-6 

c 

* 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

z 

CO 

CD 

to 

CD 

co 

0- 

o 

CD 

CM 

O 

< 

*o 

0) 

"El 

E 

* 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

z 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

0- 

o 

§ 

CO 

CO 

o 

00 

m 

CO 

CD 

< 

V 

CD 

CD 

co 

XI 

o 

E 

< 

- 

- 

z 

CM 

0. 

o 

< 

o 

|zero  Page 

* 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

z 

CO 

CO 

m 

CO 

CO 

CO 

co 

in 

CO 

in 

CO 

0- 

o 

in 

CD 

in 

CM 

CD 

o 

CM 

in 

O 

LU 

o 

co 

O 

in 

co 

UJ 

in 

< 

3 

O 

n 

< 

co 

co 

co 

CO 

CO 

CO 

co 

CO 

co 

CO 

co 

CO 

co 

z 

co 

CD 

CO 

CO 

co 

0. 

o 

Q 

CD 

o 

CM 

LU 

O 

o 

CM 

o 

o 

o 

UJ 

O 

O 

UJ 

O 

Q 

UJ 

UJ 

o 

CM 

a 

< 

[immediate 

* 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

z 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

0. 

o 

CT> 

CO 

o> 

CM 

05 

o 

O 

UJ 

o 

O 

05 

05 

< 

INSTRUCTIONS 

c 

o 

2 

aj 

X 

O 

< 

o 

+ 

2 

+ 

< 

< 

t 

2 

< 

< 

o 

o 

T 

a 

o 

II 

O 

z 

0 

1 

o 

z 

< 

x 

CD 

II 

o 

z 

o 

X 

o 

z 

< 

cr 

CD 

II 

N 

Z 

o 

X 

o 

z 

< 

x 

CD 

2 

< 

< 

ii 

z 

z 

o 

X 

o 

z 

< 

x 

CD 

o 

II 

N 

z 

o 

X 

o 

z 

< 

X 

CD 

o 

II 

z 

z 

o 

X 

o 

z 

< 

X 

CD 

ri> 

ii 

QJ 

CD 

o 

II 

> 

z 

o 

X 

o 

z 

< 

X 

CD 

II 

> 

z 

o 

X 

o 

z 

< 

X 

CD 

o 

\ 

o 

o 

t 

o 

T 

o 

> 

t 

o 

2 

1 

< 

2 

X 

2 

>- 

2 

2 

X 

t 

X 

> 

♦ 

1 

>- 

< 

t 

2 

> 

< 

2 

+ 

2 

X 

l 

+ 

X 

> 

+ 

> 

o 

o 

_i 

m 

z 

o 

X 

2 

3 

m 

3 

CD 

X 

2 

3 

d> 

X 

a) 

o 

CD 

< 

f 

2 

c 

0 

E 

01 
c 
2 

o 

Q 

< 

o 

z 

< 

CO 

< 

o 

o 

CD 

CD 

o 

CO 

o 

CD 

t- 

GO 

2 

CD 

Z 

CO 

X 

CD 

X 

X 

CD 

O 

> 

CD 

cd 

> 

CO 

o 

_l 

o 

a 

_j 

o 

O 

> 

O 

X 

2 

O 

X 

X 

o 

>- 

X 

O 

O 

LU 

D 

X 

LU 

a 

> 

LU 

a 

X 

O 

UJ 

O 

z 

X 

z 

> 

z 

X 

2 

X 

CD 

< 

o 

416 


APPENDIX  L 


TIME,  MEMORY  REQUIREMENTS 


CONDITION  CODES 

N Z C 1 D V 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

o 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

(RESTORED) 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

\ 

(RESTORED) 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

1 

1 

s 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

V 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

\ 

\ 

D MN"  IF  PAGE  BOUNDARY  IS  CROSSED.  X INDEX  X + ADD  ^ MODIFIED 

3 "N"  IF  BRANCH  OCCURS  TO  SAME  PAGE.  Y INDEX  Y -SUBTRACT  - NOT  MODIFIED 

D "N"  IF  BRANCH  OCCURS  TO  DIFFERENT  PAGE.  A ACCUMULATOR  A AND  M7  MEMORY  BIT  7 

JOT  = BORROW.  M MEMORY  PER  EFFECTIVE  ADDRESS  V OR  M6  MEMORY  BIT  6 

SIMAL  MODE  Z FLAG  IS  INVALID  Ms  MEMORY  PER  STACK  POINTER  V EXCLUSIVE  OR  N NO.  CYCLES 

ILATOR  MUST  BE  CHECKED  FOR  ZERO  RESULT.  # N0-  BYTES 

Z,  Page,  Y | 

=* 

CM 

CM 

Z 

CL 

O 

co 

CO 

CD 

CD 

Indirect  | 

2 

0. 

O 

Relative  | 

2 

CL 

o 

-O 

< 

co 

CO 

CO 

CO 

2 

M- 

m 

a 

O 

LLI 

CD 

o> 

O 

X 

CT> 

CT) 

X 

JD 

< 

» 

co 

co 

CO 

co 

co 

co 

CO 

2 

rr 

r- 

* 

m 

Ql 

o 

O 

m 

UJ 

a 

UJ 

co 

UJ 

x 

a 

X 

Q 

CD 

Z,  Page,  X | 

* 

eg 

CM 

eg 

eg 

CM 

CM 

CM 

eg 

2 

co 

co 

CO 

* 

0. 

O 

m 

co 

in 

in 

CD 

CO 

r2 

m 

LL 

m 

o 

CD 

*d 

c 

CM 

CNJ 

CM 

2 

m 

m 

co 

o 

- 

LL 

5> 

X 

■6 

c 

* 

CM 

eg 

eg 

z 

CD 

co 

CO 

CL 

O 

o 

UJ 

5 

Implied  | 

* 

r- 

- 

- 

t- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

z 

CM 

CO 

co 

co 

co 

CM 

eg 

eg 

eg 

CM 

CM 

CM 

eg 

eg 

CL 

o 

< 

UJ 

CO 

CO 

o 

CO 

CD 

CO 

eg 

o 

o 

CD 

CD 

CO 

CD 

LL 

CD 

r- 

< 

< 

CO 

< 

< 

CD 

< 

co 

< 

CD 

co 

CD 

E 

< 

T- 

- 

- 

z 

eg 

eg 

CM 

CL 

O 

< 

< 

eg 

< 

CD 

0) 

a* 

os 

CL 

o 

N 

CM 

CM 

eg 

CM 

eg 

eg 

eg 

CM 

eg 

eg 

z 

CO 

CO 

IT) 

CO 

m 

m 

CO 

CO 

co 

co 

CL 

O 

co 

< 

< 

co 

m 

CD 

CNJ 

co 

UJ 

in 

CD 

CD 

CD 

CO 

O 

A 

< 

CO 

CO 

co 

co 

co 

co 

co 

co 

co 

co 

z 

CD 

co 

co 

* 

CL 

o 

< 

o 

< 

LLI 

a 

o 

CM 

UJ 

a 

a 

co 

CO 

o 

00 

Immediatel 

CM 

CM 

eg 

eg 

z 

CNJ 

CNJ 

CM 

CNJ 

CL 

o 

CNJ 

< 

o 

< 

o 

s 

ISTRUCTIONS 

C 

o 

2 

CD 

a. 

O 

X 

t 

2 

> 

\ 

2 

o 

o 

r-- 

T 

Z 

o 

t- 

< 

DC 

UU 

CL 

o 

o 

2 

1 

> 

< 

co 

x 

1 

CO 

CO 

2 

\ 

< 

CO 

x 

1 

CO 

CO 

2 

l 

< 

t 

CO 

2 

CO 

x 

+ 

co 

CL 

* 

CO 

2 

CO 

x 

+ 

CO 

o 

It 

rx 

1- 

z 

Z 

X 

X 

d) 

il 

a> 

aj 

co 

m 

3 

CO 

z 

X 

X 

d> 

Ll 

§ 

CO 

< 

t 

IO 

2 

1 

< 

o 

x 

a 

x 

T 

2 

t 

< 

2 

\ 

X 

2 

♦ 

X 

X 

t 

< 

X 

* 

< 

X 

t 

CO 

< 

t 

X 

co 

t 

X 

< 

♦ 

X 

o 

‘E 

o 

E 

a> 

c 

S 

X 

o 

_l 

x 

Q 

DC 

CO 

CL 

O 

z 

< 

DC 

O 

< 

X 

CL 

CL 

X 

CL 

< 

CL 

CL 

CL 

o 

X 

X 

O 

X 

f— 

X 

CO 

1- 

X 

O 

CD 

CO 

o 

X 

CO 

a 

co 

UJ 

CO 

< 

1— 

CO 

X 
i — 
CO 

X 

i— 

CO 

X 

< 

1- 

< 

1- 

X 

CO 

< 

X 

CO 

X 

i- 

< 

X 

t— 

hH^xSs 

- - CNJ  a;  -) 

Q Q D CE  2 o 
O Q Q < u O 

< < < O It  < 

APPENDIX  L 


417 


NOTE:  COMMODORE  SEMICONDUCTOR  GROUP  cannot  assume  liability  for  the  use  of  undefined  OP  CODES. 


6510  MEMORY  MAP 


FFFF 

A 


f 
0200 
01 FF 


0100 

00FF 


0000 


01FF 


0001 

0000 


STACK 

** POINTER 

INITIALIZED 


Used  For 
Internal 
I/O  Port 


APPLICATIONS  NOTES 


Locating  the  Output  Register  at  the  internal  I/O  Port  in  Page  Zero 
enhances  the  powerful  Zero  Page  Addressing  instructions  of  the  6510. 

By  assigning  the  I/O  Pins  as  inputs  (using  the  Data  Direction  Register) 
the  user  has  the  ability  to  change  the  contents  of  address  0001  (the 
Output  Register)  using  peripheral  devices.  The  ability  to  change  these 
contents  using  peripheral  inputs,  together  with  Zero  Page  Indirect  Ad- 
dressing instructions,  allows  novel  and  versatile  programming  tech- 
niques not  possible  earlier. 


COMMODORE  SEMICONDUCTOR  GROUP  reserves  the  right  to  make  changes  to  any 
products  herein  to  improve  reliability,  function  or  design.  COMMODORE  SEMICON- 
DUCTOR GROUP  does  not  assume  any  liability  arising  out  of  the  application  or  use  of 
any  product  or  circuit  described  herein;  neither  does  it  convey  any  license  under  its 
patent  rights  nor  the  rights  of  others. 


418  APPENDIX  L 


APPENDIX  M 


6526  COMPLEX  INTERFACE  ADAPTER 
(CIA)  CHIP  SPECIFICATIONS 

DESCRIPTION 

The  6526  Complex  Interface  Adapter  (CIA)  is  a 65XX  bus  compatible 
peripheral  interface  device  with  extremely  flexible  timing  and  I/O 
capabilities. 

FEATURES 

• 16  Individually  programmable  I/O  lines 

• 8 or  16-Bit  handshaking  on  read  or  write 

• 2 independent,  linkable  16-Bit  interval  timers 

• 24-hour  (AAA/PM)  time  of  day  clock  with  programmable  alarm 

• 8-Bit  shift  register  for  serial  I/O 

• 2TTL  Load  capability 

• CAAOS  compatible  I/O  lines 

• 1 or  2 AAHz  operation  available 


APPENDIX  M 419 


PIN  CONFIGURATION 




vss 

1 

40 

CNT 

PA0 

2 

39 

SP 

PA*| 

3 

38 

rs0 

pa2 

4 

37 

RS-, 

pa3 

5 

36 

rs2 

< 

CL 

6 

35 

rs3 

pa5 

7 

34 

RES 

pa6 

8 

33 

DB0 

PA7 

9 

32 

DB-, 

PBq 

10 

6526 

31 

db2 

PBi 

11 

30 

db3 

CM 

CD 

CL 

12 

29 

db4 

PB3 

13 

28 

db5 

pb4 

14 

27 

db6 

pb5 

15 

26 

db7 

PB6 

16 

25 

<t>2 

pb7 

17 

24 

FLAG 

PC 

18 

23 

CS 

TOD 

19 

22 

R/W 

VCC 

20 

21 

IRQ 

420  APPENDIX  M 


6526 

BLOCK  DIAGRAM 


D0-D7 


SP 


CNT 


TOD 


FLAG 


IRQ 


PA0-PA7 


PC 


PB0-PB7 


R/W  02  CS  RS3  RS2  RSI  RSO  RES 


APPENDIX  M 421 


MAXIMUM  RATINGS 


Supply  Voltage,  Vcc 
Input/Output  Voltage,  ViN 
Operating  Temperature,  T0p 
Storage  Temperature,  Tstg 


-0.3V  to  + 7.0V 
-0.3V  to  + 7.0V 
0°  C to  70°  C 
-55°  C to  150°  C 


All  inputs  contain  protection  circuitry  to  prevent  damage  due  to  high 
static  discharges.  Care  should  be  exercised  to  prevent  unnecessary  ap- 
plication of  voltages  in  excess  of  the  allowable  limits. 


COMMENT 


Stresses  above  those  listed  under  "Absolute  Maximum  Ratings"  may 
cause  permanent  damage  to  the  device.  These  are  stress  ratings  only. 
Functional  operation  of  this  device  at  these  or  any  other  conditions 
above  those  indicated  in  the  operational  sections  of  this  specification  is 
not  implied  and  exposure  to  absolute  maximum  rating  conditions  for 
extended  periods  may  affect  device  reliability. 


ELECTRICAL  CHARACTERISTICS  (Vcc  ± 5%,  Vss  = 0 V,  TA 
= 0-70C) 


CHARACTERISTIC 

SYMBOL 

MIN. 

TYP. 

MAX. 

UNIT 

Input  High  Voltage 

V,H 

+ 2.4 

— 

< 

o 

o 

V 

Input  Low  Voltage 

V,L 

-0.3 

— 

— 

V 

Input  Leakage  Current; 

VIN  = Vss  +5V 
(TOD,  R/W,  FLAG,<£2, 

RES,  RS0-RS3,  CS) 

1 IN 

1.0 

2.5 

fl  A 

422  APPENDIX  M 


CHARACTERISTIC 

SYMBOL 

MIN. 

TYP. 

MAX. 

UNIT 

Port  Input  Pull-up  Resistance 

Rpi 

3.1 

5.0 

— 

KO 

Output  Leakage  Current  for 

High  Impedance  State  (Three 
State);  VIN  = 4V  to  2.4V; 
(DB0-DB7,  SP,  CNT,  IRQ) 

Its: 

±1.0 

±10.0 

fiA 

Output  High  Voltage 

VCC=MIN,  ILOad  < 

-200/j.A  (PA0-PA7,  PC 

PB0-PB7,  DB0-DB7) 

X 

o 

> 

+ 2.4 

< 

o 

o 

V 

Output  Low  Voltage 

V cc=  AAI N , Iload  ^ 3.2  mA 

-1 

o 

> 

— 

— 

+ 0.40 

V 

Output  High  Current  (Sourcing); 
V0H  > 2.4V  (PA0-PA7, 

PB0-PB7,  PC,  DB0-DB7 

*OH 

-200 

-1000 

— 

fJL  A 

Output  Low  Current  (Sinking); 

V0L  < .4V  (PA0-PA7,  PC, 
PB0-PB7,  DB0-DB7) 

•OL 

3.2 

— 

— 

mA 

Input  Capacitance 

Qn 

— 

7 

10 

Pf 

Output  Capacitance 

^OUT 

— 

7 

10 

Pf 

Power  Supply  Current 

•cc 

— 

70 

100 

mA 

APPENDIX  M 423 


2 

2 

o 

< 

Q 

O 


I- 

LU 

t 

oc 

£ 

(0 

CM 

10 

(0 


a. 

z 


UJ  D 

£2 

cc  b 

LU  < 
CL  Q 


ZcD 

> 22 

? < CD 

cr  QQ 


424  APPENDIX  M 


oj  o ICO  CO  < <00 

^ 0-  lo  tr  cr  Q Q 


APPENDIX  M 


T 


425 


6526  INTERFACE  SIGNALS 


<p 2 — Clock  Input 

The  </> 2 clock  is  a TTL  compatible  input  used  for  internal  device  opera- 
tion and  as  a timing  reference  for  communicating  with  the  system  data 
bus. 

CS — Chip  Select  Input 

The  CS  input  controls  the  activity  of  the  6526.  A low  level  on  CS  while 
</> 2 is  high  causes  the  device  to  respond  to  signals  on  the  R/W  and  ad- 
dress (RS)  lines.  A high  on  CS  prevents  these  lines  from  controlling  the 
6526.  The  CS  line  is  normally  activated  (low)  at  <f>2  by  the  appropriate 
address  combination. 

R/W— Read/Write  Input 

The  R/W  signal  is  normally  supplied  by  the  microprocessor  and  con- 
trols the  direction  of  data  transfers  of  the  6526.  A high  on  R/W  indicates 
a read  (data  transfer  out  of  the  6526),  while  a low  indicates  a write 
(data  transfer  into  the  6526). 

RS3-RS0 — Address  Inputs 

The  address  inputs  select  the  internal  registers  as  described  by  the 
Register  Map. 

DB7-BD0 — Data  Bus  Inputs/Outputs 

The  eight  data  bus  pins  transfer  information  between  the  6526  and 
the  system  data  bus.  These  pins  are  high  impedance  inputs  unless  CS  is 
low  and  R/W  and  </> 2 are  high  to  read  the  device.  During  this  read,  the 
data  bus  output  buffers  are  enabled,  driving  the  data  from  the  selected 
register  onto  the  system  data  bus. 

IRQ — Interrupt  Request  Output 

IRQ  is  an  open  drain  output  normally  connected  to  the  processor  inter- 
rupt input.  An  external  pullup  resistor  holds  the  signal  high,  allowing 
multiple  IRQ  outputs  to  be  connected  together.  The  IRQ  output  is  nor- 
mally off  (high  impedance)  and  is  activated  low  as  indicated  in  the 
functional  description. 


426 


APPENDIX  M 


RES  — Reset  Input 

A low  on  the  RES  pin  resets  all  internal  registers.  The  port  pins  are  set 
as  inputs  and  port  registers  to  zero  (although  a read  of  the  ports  will 
return  all  highs  because  of  passive  pullups).  The  timer  control  registers 
are  set  to  zero  and  the  timer  latches  to  all  ones.  All  other  registers  are 
reset  to  zero. 


6526  SYSTEM  TIMING  CHARACTERISTICS 


1W 

\Hz 

2MHz 

Symbol 

Characteristic 

MIN 

MAX 

MIN 

MAX 

Unit 

Tcyc 

c f>2  Clock 

Cycle  Time 

1000 

20,000 

500 

20,000 

ns 

Tr , Tf 

Rise  and  Fall  Time 

— 

25 

— 

25 

ns 

Tchw 

Clock  Pulse  Width 
(High) 

440 

10,000 

255 

10,000 

ns 

Tclw 

Clock  Pulse  Width 
(Low) 

420 

10,000 

200 

10,000 

ns 

Tpd 

Write  Cycle 

Output  Delay 

From  02 

960 

460 

ns 

Twcs 

CS  low 

while  02  high 

280 

255 

ns 

Tads 

Address  Setup  Time 

58 

— 

20 

— 

ns 

Tadh 

Address  Hold  Time 

10 

— 

10 

— 

ns 

Trws 

R/W  Setup  Time 

15 

— 

15 

— 

ns 

Trwh 

R/W  Hold  Time 

15 

— 

15 

— 

ns 

Tds 

Data  Bus  Setup 

Time 

200 

75 

ns 

Tdh 

Data  Bus  Hold  Time 

25 

— 

15 

— 

ns 

Tps 

Read  Cycle 

Port  Setup  Time 

300 

150 

ns 

Twcs(2) 

CS  low 

while  02  high 

280 

255 

ns 

Tads 

Address  Setup  Time 

58 

— 

20 

— 

ns 

Tadh 

Address  Hold  Time 

10 

— 

10 

— 

ns 

Trws 

R/W  Setup  Time 

15 

— 

15 

— 

ns 

Trwh 

R/W  Hold  Time 

15 

— 

15 

— 

ns 

—i 

o 

o 

CS  to  valid 

Data  Out 

240 

150 

APPENDIX  M 427 


T 


1MHz 

2MHz 

Symbol 

Characteristic 

MIN 

MAX 

MIN 

MAX 

Unit 

Tacc 

Data  Access  from 

RS3-RS0 

550 

275 

ns 

Tco(3) 

Data  Access  from 

CS 

_ 

320 

_ 

150 

ns 

Tdr 

Data  Release  Time 

50 

— 

25 

— 

ns 

NOTES:  1 — All  timings  are  referenced  from  V)L  max  and  Vm  min  on  inputs  and  V0L 
max  and  V0H  min  on  outputs. 

2 —  Twcs  is  measured  from  the  later  of  (f)2  high  or  CS  low.  CS  must  be  low  at 
least  until  the  end  of  (f) 2 high. 

3 —  Tco  is  measured  from  the  later  of  <f) 2 high  or  CS  low. 

Valid  data  is  available  only  after  the  later  of  Tacc  or  TCo- 


REGISTER  MAP 


RS3 

RS2 

RSI 

RSO 

REG 

NAME 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

PRA 

PERIPHERAL  DATA  REG  A 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

PRB 

PERIPHERAL  DATA  REG  B 

0 

0 

1 

0 

2 

DDRA 

DATA  DIRECTION  REG  A 

0 

0 

1 

1 

3 

DDRB 

DATA  DIRECTION  REG  B 

0 

1 

0 

0 

4 

TA  LO 

TIMER  A LOW  REGISTER 

0 

1 

0 

1 

5 

TA  HI 

TIMER  A HIGH  REGISTER 

0 

1 

1 

0 

6 

TB  LO 

TIMER  B LOW  REGISTER 

0 

1 

1 

1 

7 

TB  HI 

TIMER  B HIGH  REGISTER 

1 

0 

0 

0 

8 

TOD  1 OTHS 

10THS  OF  SECONDS  REGISTER 

1 

0 

0 

1 

9 

TOD  SEC 

SECONDS  REGISTER 

1 

0 

1 

0 

A 

TOD  MIN 

MINUTES  REGISTER 

1 

0 

1 

1 

B 

TOD  HR 

HOURS— AAA/PM  REGISTER 

1 

1 

0 

0 

C 

SDR 

SERIAL  DATA  REGISTER 

1 

1 

0 

1 

D 

ICR 

INTERRUPT  CONTROL  REGISTER 

1 

1 

1 

0 

E 

CRA 

CONTROL  REG  A 

1 

1 

1 

1 

F 

CRB 

CONTROL  REG  B 

428  APPENDIX  M 


6526  FUNCTIONAL  DESCRIPTION 

I/O  Ports  (PRA,  PRB,  DDRA,  DDRB). 

Ports  A and  B each  consist  of  an  8-bit  Peripheral  Data  Register  (PR) 
and  an  8-bit  Data  Direction  Register  (DDR).  If  a bit  in  the  DDR  is  set  to  a 
one,  the  corresponding  bit  in  the  PR  is  an  output;  if  a DDR  bit  is  set  to  a 
zero,  the  corresponding  PR  bit  is  defined  as  an  input.  On  a READ,  the  PR 
reflects  the  information  present  on  the  actual  port  pins  (PAO— PA7, 
PB0-PB7)  for  both  input  and  output  bits.  Port  A and  Port  B have  passive 
pull-up  devices  as  well  as  active  pull-ups,  providing  both  CMOS  and  TTL 
compatibility.  Both  ports  have  two  TTL  load  drive  capability.  In  addition 
to  normal  I/O  operation,  PB6  and  PB7  also  provide  timer  output  func- 
tions. 

Handshaking 

Handshaking  on  data  transfers  can  be  accomplished  using  the  PC 
output  pin  and  the  FLAG  input  pin.  PC  will  go  low  for  one  cycle  following 
a read  or  write  of  PORT  B.  This  signal  can  be  used  to  indicate  "data 
ready"  at  PORT  B or  "data  accepted"  from  PORT  B.  Handshaking  on 
16-bit  data  transfers  (using  both  PORT  A and  PORT  B)  is  possible  by 
always  reading  or  writing  PORT  A first.  FLAG  is  a negative  edge  sensi- 
tive input  which  can  be  used  for  receiving  the  PC  output  from  another 
6526,  or  as  a general  purpose  interrupt  input.  Any  negative  transition  of 
FLAG  will  set  the  FLAG  interrupt  bit. 


REG 

NAME 

D7 

d6 

d5 

d4 

d3 

d2 

Di 

Do 

0 

PRA 

pa7 

pa6 

PAs 

PA4 

pa3 

cm 

< 

CL 

PA, 

PA0 

1 

PRB 

pb7 

pb6 

PBs 

PB4 

pb3 

CM 

CD 

Q. 

PB, 

PB0 

2 

DDRA 

dpa7 

dpa6 

dpa5 

dpa4 

dpa3 

dpa2 

DPA-, 

DPA0 

3 

DDRB 

dpb7 

dpb6 

dpb5 

dpb4 

dpb3 

dpb2 

DPB-i 

DPB0 

Interval  Timers  (Timer  A,  Timer  B) 

Each  interval  timer  consists  of  a 16-bit  read-only  Timer  Counter  and  a 
16-bit  write-only  Timer  Latch.  Data  written  to  the  timer  are  latched  in  the 
Timer  Latch,  while  data  read  from  the  timer  are  the  present  contents  of 
the  Time  Counter.  The  timers  can  be  used  independently  or  linked  for 
extended  operations.  The  various  timer  modes  allow  generation  of  long 
time  delays,  variable  width  pulses,  pulse  trains  and  variable  frequency 

APPENDIX  M 429 


H 


waveforms.  Utilizing  the  CNT  input,  the  timers  can  count  external  pulses 
or  measure  frequency,  pulse  width  and  delay  times  of  external  signals. 
Each  timer  has  an  associated  control  register,  providing  independent 
control  of  the  following  functions: 

Start/Stop 

A control  bit  allows  the  timer  to  be  started  or  stopped  by  the  micro- 
processor at  any  time. 

PB  On/Off: 

A control  bit  allows  the  timer  output  to  appear  on  a PORT  B output 
line  (PB6  for  TIMER  A and  PB7  for  TIMER  B).  This  function  overrides  the 
DDRB  control  bit  and  forces  the  appropriate  PB  line  to  an  output. 

Toggle/Pulse 

A control  bit  selects  the  output  applied  to  PORT  B.  On  every  timer 
underflow  the  output  can  either  toggle  or  generate  a single  positive 
pulse  of  one  cycle  duration.  The  Toggle  output  is  set  high  whenever  the 
timer  is  started  and  is  set  low  by  RES. 

One-Shot/Continuous 

A control  bit  selects  either  timer  mode.  In  one-shot  mode,  the  timer 
will  count  down  from  the  latched  value  to  zero,  generate  an  interrupt, 
reload  the  latched  value,  then  stop.  In  continuous  mode,  the  timer  will 
count  from  the  latched  value  to  zero,  generate  an  interrupt,  reload  the 
latched  value  and  repeat  the  procedure  continuously. 

Force  Load 

A strobe  bit  allows  the  timer  latch  to  be  loaded  into  the  timer  counter 
at  any  time,  whether  the  timer  is  running  or  not. 

Input  Mode: 

Control  bits  allow  selection  of  the  clock  used  to  decrement  the  timer. 
TIMER  A can  count  (f) 2 clock  pulses  or  external  pulses  applied  to  the  CNT 
pin.  TIMER  B can  count  </) 2 pulses,  external  CNT  pulses,  TIMER  A under- 
flow pulses  or  TIMER  A underflow  pulses  while  the  CNT  pin  is  held  high. 

The  timer  latch  is  loaded  into  the  timer  on  any  timer  underflow,  on  a 
force  load  or  following  a write  to  the  high  byte  of  the  prescaler  while  the 
timer  is  stopped.  If  the  timer  is  running,  a write  to  the  high  byte  will  load 
the  timer  latch,  but  not  reload  the  counter. 


430  APPENDIX  M 


READ  (TIMER) 

REG  NAME 


4 

TA  LO 

tal7 

TALe 

TALS 

tal4 

tal3 

tal2 

TAL-, 

TALo 

5 

TA  HI 

tah7 

TAH6 

tah5 

tah4 

tah3 

tah2 

TAH! 

TAH0 

6 

TB  LO 

tbl7 

TBU 

tbl5 

tbl4 

tbl3 

tbl2 

TBL-i 

TBLo 

7 

TB  HI 

tbh7 

tbh6 

tbh5 

tbh4 

tbh3 

tbh2 

TBH-, 

TBH0 

WRITE  (PRESCALER) 

REG  NAME 


4 

TA  LO 

pal7 

pal6 

pal5 

pal4 

pal3 

pal2 

PAL, 

PALo 

5 

TA  HI 

pah7 

pah6 

pah5 

pah4 

pah3 

pah2 

PAH-, 

PAH0 

6 

TB  LO 

CO 

Q_ 

PBU 

pbl5 

pbl4 

pbl3 

pbl2 

PBL, 

PBLo 

7 

TB  HI 

pbh7 

pbh6 

pbh5 

pbh4 

pbh3 

pbh2 

PBHt 

PBH0 

Time  of  Day  Clock  (TOD) 

The  TOD  clock  is  a special  purpose  timer  for  real-time  applications. 
TOD  consists  of  a 24-hour  (AM/PM)  clock  with  1 / 1 Oth  second  resolution.  It 
is  organized  into  4 registers:  lOths  of  seconds,  Seconds,  Minutes  and 
Hours.  The  AM/PM  flag  is  in  the  MSB  of  the  Hours  register  for  easy  bit 
testing.  Each  register  reads  out  in  BCD  format  to  simplify  conversion  for 
driving  displays,  etc.  The  clock  requires  an  external  60  Hz  or  50  Hz 
(programmable)  TTL  level  input  on  the  TOD  pin  for  accurate  time- 
keeping. In  addition  to  time-keeping,  a programmable  ALARM  is  pro- 
vided for  generating  an  interrupt  at  a desired  time.  The  ALARM  registers 
are  located  at.the  same  addresses  as  the  corresponding  TOD  registers. 
Access  to  the  ALARM  is  governed  by  a Control  Register  bit.  The  ALARM 
is  write-only;  any  read  of  a TOD  address  will  read  time  regardless  of  the 
state  of  the  ALARM  access  bit. 

A specific  sequence  of  events  must  be  followed  for  proper  setting  and 
reading  of  TOD.  TOD  is  automatically  stopped  whenever  a write  to  the 
Hours  register  occurs.  The  clock  will  not  start  again  until  after  a write  to 
the  lOths  of  seconds  register.  This  assures  TOD  will  always  start  at  the 
desired  time.  Since  a carry  from  one  stage  to  the  next  can  occur  at  any 
time  with  respect  to  a read  operation,  a latching  function  is  included  to 
keep  all  Time  Of  Day  information  constant  during  a read  sequence.  All 
four  TOD  registers  latch  on  a read  of  Hours  and  remain  latched  until 
after  a read  of  lOths  of  seconds.  The  TOD  clock  continues  to  count  when 

APPENDIX  M 431 


3E 


the  output  registers  are  latched.  If  only  one  register  is  to  be  read,  there 
is  no  carry  problem  and  the  register  can  be  read  "on  the  fly/'  provided 
that  any  read  of  Hours  is  followed  by  a read  of  lOths  of  seconds  to 
disable  the  latching. 


READ 

REG  NAME 


8 

TOD  10THS 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Te 

T4 

t2 

T, 

9 

TOD  SEC 

0 

sh4 

cvl 

I 

co 

SHt 

sl8 

sl4 

sl2 

SL, 

A 

TOD  MIN 

0 

mh4 

mh2 

MHt 

ml8 

ml4 

ml2 

ML, 

B 

TOD  HR 

PM 

0 

0 

HH 

hl8 

hl4 

hl2 

HL, 

WRITE 

crb7=o  tod 
crb7=i  alarm 

(SAME  FORMAT  AS  READ) 

Serial  Port  (SDR) 

The  serial  port  is  a buffered,  8-bit  synchronous  shift  register  system.  A 
control  bit  selects  input  or  output  mode.  In  input  mode,  data  on  the  SP 
pin  is  shifted  into  the  shift  register  on  the  rising  edge  of  the  signal 
applied  to  the  CNT  pin.  After  8 CNT  pulses,  the  data  in  the  shift  register 
is  dumped  into  the  Serial  Data  Register  and  an  interrupt  is  generated.  In 
the  output  mode,  TIMER  A is  used  for  the  baud  rate  generator.  Data  is 
shifted  out  on  the  SP  pin  at  V2  the  underflow  rate  of  TIMER  A.  The 
maximum  baud  rate  possible  is  02  divided  by  4,  but  the  maximum  use- 
able  baud  rate  will  be  determined  by  line  loading  and  the  speed  at 
which  the  receiver  responds  to  input  data.  Transmission  will  start  follow- 
ing a write  to  the  Serial  Data  Register  (provided  TIMER  A is  running  and 
in  continuous  mode).  The  clock  signal  derived  from  TIMER  A appears  as 
an  output  on  the  CNT  pin.  The  data  in  the  Serial  Data  Register  will  be 
loaded  into  the  shift  register  then  shift  out  to  the  SP  pin  when  a CNT 
pulse  occurs.  Data  shifted  out  becomes  valid  on  the  falling  edge  of  CNT 
and  remains  valid  until  the  next  falling  edge.  After  8 CNT  pulses,  an 
interrupt  is  generated  to  indicate  more  data  can  be  sent.  If  the  Serial 
Data  Register  was  loaded  with  new  information  prior  to  this  interrupt, 
the  new  data  will  automatically  be  loaded  into  the  shift  register  and 
transmission  will  continue.  If  the  microprocessor  stays  one  byte  ahead  of 
the  shift  register,  transmission  will  be  continuous.  If  no  further  data  is  to 
be  transmitted,  after  the  8th  CNT  pulse,  CNT  will  return  high  and  SP  will 


432  APPENDIX  M 


remain  at  the  level  of  the  last  data  bit  transmitted.  SDR  data  is  shifted 
out  MSB  first  and  serial  input  data  should  also  appear  in  this  format. 

The  bidirectional  capability  of  the  Serial  Port  and  CNT  clock  allows 
many  6526  devices  to  be  connected  to  a common  serial  communication 
bus  on  which  one  6526  acts  as  a master,  sourcing  data  and  shift  clock, 
while  all  other  6526  chips  act  as  slaves.  Both  CNT  and  SP  outputs  are 
open  drain  to  allow  such  a common  bus.  Protocol  for  master/slave 
selection  can  be  transmitted  over  the  serial  bus,  or  via  dedicated  hand- 
shaking lines. 


REG  NAME 


c 

SDR 

$7 

s6 

$5 

s4 

s3 

s2 

Si 

So 

Interrupt  Control  (ICR) 

There  are  five  sources  of  interrupts  on  the  6526:  underflow  from  TIMER 
A,  underflow  from  TIMER  B,  TOD  ALARM,  Serial  Port  full/empty  and 
FLAG.  A single  register  provides  masking  and  interrupt  information.  The 
interrupt  Control  Register  consists  of  a write-only  MASK  register  and  a 
read-only  DATA  register.  Any  interrupt  will  set  the  corresponding  bit  in 
the  DATA  register.  Any  interrupt  which  is  enabled  by  the  MASK  register 
will  set  the  IR  bit  (MSB)  of  the  DATA  register  and  bring  the  IRQ  pin  low. 
In  a multi-chip  system,  the  IR  bit  can  be  polled  to  detect  which  chip  has 
generated  an  interrupt  request.  The  interrupt  DATA  register  is  cleared 
and  the  IRQ  line  returns  high  following  a read  of  the  DATA  register. 
Since  each  interrupt  sets  an  interrupt  bit  regardless  of  the  MASK,  and 
each  interrupt  bit  can  be  selectively  masked  to  prevent  the  generation  of 
a processor  interrupt,  it  is  possible  to  intermix  polled  interrupts  with  true 
interrupts.  However,  polling  the  IR  bit  will  cause  the  DATA  register  to 
clear,  therefore,  it  is  up  to  the  user  to  preserve  the  information  con- 
tained in  the  DATA  register  if  any  polled  interrupts  were  present. 

The  MASK  register  provides  convenient  control  of  individual  mask  bits. 
When  writing  to  the  MASK  register,  if  bit  7 (SET/CLEAR)  of  the  data 
written  is  a ZERO,  any  mask  bit  written  with  a one  will  be  cleared,  while 
those  mask  bits  written  with  a zero  will  be  unaffected.  If  bit  7 of  the 
data  written  is  a ONE,  any  mask  bit  written  with  a one  will  be  set,  while 
those  mask  bits  written  with  a zero  will  be  unaffected.  In  order  for  an 
interrupt  flag  to  set  IR  and  generate  an  Interrupt  Request,  the  corre- 
sponding MASK  bit  must  be  set. 


APPENDIX  M 


433 


READ  (INT  DATA) 

REG  NAME 


D 

ICR 

IR 

0 

0 

FLG 

SP 

ALRM, 

TB 

TA 

WRITE  (INT  MASK) 

REG 

NAME 

D 

ICR 

s/c 

X 

X 

FLG 

SP 

ALRM 

TB 

TA 

CONTROL  REGISTERS 


There  are  two  control  registers  in  the  6526,  CRA  and  CRB.  CRA  is 
associated  with  TIMER  A and  CRB  is  associated  with  TIMER  B.  The  regis- 
ter format  is  as  follows: 


CRA: 

Bit  Name 

0 START 

1 PBON 

2 OUTMODE 

3 RUNMODE 

4 LOAD 

5 INMODE 

6 SPMODE 

7 TODIN 


Function 

1 = START  TIMER  A,  0 = STOP  TIMER  A.  This  bit  is 
automatically  reset  when  underflow  occurs  during 
one-shot  mode. 

1=TIMER  A output  appears  on  PB6,  0=PB6  normal 
operation. 

1 =TOGGLE,  0=PULSE 
1 =ONE-SHOT,  0=CONTINUOUS 
1=  FORCE  LOAD  (this  is  a STROBE  input,  there  is  no 
data  storage,  bit  4 will  always  read  back  a zero 
and  writing  a zero  has  no  effect). 

1=TIMER  A counts  positive  CNT  transitions,  0 = 
TIMER  A counts  </>2  pulses. 

1 =SERIAL  PORT  output  (CNT  sources  shift  clock), 
0 = SERIAL  PORT  input  (external  shift  clock  required). 
1=50  Hz  clock  required  on  TOD  pin  for  accurate 
time,  0 = 60  Hz  clock  required  on  TOD  pin  for  accu- 
rate time. 


434  APPENDIX  M 


CRB: 

Bit  Name 


5,6  INMODE 


7 ALARM 


Function 

(Bits  CRB0-CRB4  are  identical  to  CRA0-CRA4  for 
TIMER  B with  the  exception  that  bit  1 controls  the 
output  of  TIMER  B on  PB7). 

Bits  CRB5  and  CRB6  select  one  of  four  input  modes 


for  TIMER 

CRB6 

0 

B as: 

CRB5 

0 

TIMER  B counts  </>2  pulses. 

0 

1 

TIMER  B counts  positive  CNT 

1 

0 

transistions. 

TIMER  B counts  TIMER  A 

1 

1 

underflow  pulses. 

TIMER  B counts  TIMER  A 

underflow  pulses  while  CNT  is 
high. 

1 =writing  to  TOD  registers  sets  ALARM,  0=writing 

to  TOD  registers  sets  TOD  clock. 


REG 

NAME 

TOD 

IN 

SP 

MODE 

IN 

MODE 

LOAD 

RUN 

MODE 

OUT 

MODE 

PB  ON 

START 

E 

CRA 

0=60Hz 

l=50Hz 

0=INPUT 

1 =OUTPUT 

0=02 

1 =CNT 

l=FORCE 

LOAD 

(STROBE) 

0 = CONT. 

1 =O.S. 

0=PULSE 

1=  TOGGLE 

o=pb6off 

l=PBeON 

0=STOP 

1 = START 

I TA 


RUN  OUT 


REG 

NAME 

ALARM 

IN 

MODE 

LOAD 

MODE 

MODE 

PB  ON 

START 

F 

CRB 

0=TOD 

0 

0=02 

1=  FORCE 

0=CONT. 

0=PULSE 

0 = PB7  OFF 

0=STOP 

i 

1 =CNT 

LOAD 

l 

o 

II 

> 

1 = 

i 

1=CNT-TA 

(STROBE) 

1 =o.s. 

1 =TOGGLE 

1 =pb7  on 

1 = START 

ALARM 

L — TB 


All  unused  register  bits  are  unaffected  by  a write  and  are  forced  to  zero 
on  a read. 

COMMODORE  SEMICONDUCTOR  GROUP  reserves  the  right  to  make  changes  to  any 
products* herein  to  improve  reliability,  function  or  design.  COMMODORE  SEMICON- 
DUCTOR GROUP  does  not  assume  any  liability  arising  out  of  the  application  or  use  of 
any  product  or  circuit  described  herein;  neither  does  it  convey  any  license  under  its 
patent  rights  nor  the  rights  of  others. 


APPENDIX  M 435 


T 


APPENDIX  N 


6566/6567  (VIC-II)  CHIP 
SPECIFICATIONS 


The  6566/6567  are  multi-purpose  color  video  controller  devices  for  use 
in  both  computer  video  terminals  and  video  game  applications.  Both 
devices  contain  47  control  registers  which  are  accessed  via  a standard 
8-bit  microprocessor  bus  (65XX)  and  will  access  up  to  16K  of  memory 
for  display  information.  The  various  operating  modes  and  options  within 
each  mode  are  described. 


CHARACTER  DISPLAY  MODE 


In  the  character  display  mode,  the  6566/6567  fetches  CHARACTER 
POINTERS  from  the  VIDEO  MATRIX  area  of  memory  and  translates  the 
pointers  to  character  dot  location  addresses  in  the  2048  byte  CHAR- 
ACTER BASE  area  of  memory.  The  video  matrix  is  comprised  of  1000 
consecutive  locations  in  memory  which  each  contain  an  eight-bit  char- 
acter pointer.  The  location  of  the  video  matrix  within  memory  is  defined 
by  VM13-VM10  in  register  24  ($18)  which  are  used  as  the  4 MSB  of  the 
video  matrix  address.  The  lower  order  10  bits  are  provided  by  an  inter- 
nal counter  (VC3-VC0)  which  steps  through  the  1000  character  loca- 
tions. Note  that  the  6566/6567  provides  14  address  outputs;  therefore, 
additional  system  hardware  may  be  required  for  complete  system 
memory  decodes. 


CHARACTER  POINTER  ADDRESS 


A13 

A12 

All 

A10 

A09 

A08 

A07 

A06 

A05 

A04 

A03 

A02 

A01 

A00 

VM13 

VM12 

VM1 1 

VM1 0 

VC9 

VC8 

VC7 

VC6 

VC5 

VC4 

VC3 

VC2 

VC1 

VCO 

436  APPENDIX  N 


The  eight-bit  character  pointer  permits  up  to  256  different  character 
definitions  to  be  available  simultaneously.  Each  character  is  an  8X8  dot 
matrix  stored  in  the  character  base  as  eight  consecutive  bytes.  The  loca- 
tion of  the  character  base  is  defined  by  CB13-CB11  also  in  register  24 
($18)  which  are  used  for  the  3 most  significant  bits  (MSB)  of  the  char- 
acter base  address.  The  1 1 lower  order  addresses  are  formed  by  the 
8-bit  character  pointer  from  the  video  matrix  (D7-D0)  which  selects  a 
particular  character,  and  a 3-bit  raster  counter  (RC2-RC0)  which  selects 
one  of  the  eight  character  bytes.  The  resulting  characters  are  formatted 
as  25  rows  of  40  characters  each.  In  addition  to  the  8-bit  character 
pointer,  a 4-bit  COLOR  NYBBLE  is  associated  with  each  video  matrix 
location  (the  video  matrix  memory  must  be  12  bits  wide)  which  defines 
one  of  sixteen  colors  for  each  character. 


CHARACTER  DATA  ADDRESS 


A13 

A12 

All 

A10 

A09 

A08 

A07 

A06 

A05 

A04 

A03 

A02 

A01 

A00 

CB1 3 

CB12 

CB1 1 

D7 

D6 

D5 

D4 

D3 

D2 

D1 

DO 

RC2 

RC1 

RCO 

STANDARD  CHARACTER  MODE  (MCM  = BMM  = ECM  = 0) 

In  the  standard  character  mode,  the  8 sequential  bytes  from  the 
character  base  are  displayed  directly  on  the  8 lines  in  each  character 
region.  A "0"  bit  causes  the  background  #0  color  (from  register  33 
($21))  to  be  displayed  while  the  color  selected  by  the  color  nybble 
(foreground)  is  displayed  for  a "1"  bit  (see  Color  Code  Table). 


FUNCTION 

CHARACTER 

BIT 

COLOR  DISPLAYED 

Background 

0 

Background  #0  color 

(register  33  ($21)) 

Foreground 

1 

Color  selected  by  4-bit  color  nybble 

Therefore,  each  character  has  a unique  color  determined  by  the  4-bit 
color  nybble  (1  of  16)  and  all  characters  share  the  common  background 
color. 


APPENDIX  N 


437 


MULTI-COLOR  CHARACTER  MODE  (MCM  = 1 , BMM  = ECM 

= 0 


Multi-color  mode  provides  additional  color  flexibility  allowing  up  to 
four  colors  within  each  character  but  with  reduced  resolution.  The 
multi-color  mode  is  selected  by  setting  the  MCM  bit  in  register  22  ($16) 
to  "1,"  which  causes  the  dot  data  stored  in  the  character  base  to  be 
interpreted  in  a different  manner.  If  the  MSB  of  the  color  nybble  is  a 
"0,"  the  character  will  be  displayed  as  described  in  standard  character 
mode,  allowing  the  two  modes  to  be  inter-mixed  (however,  only  the 
lower  order  8 colors  are  available).  When  the  MSB  of  the  color  nybble  is 
a "1"  (if  MCM:MSB(CM)  = 1)  the  character  bits  are  interpreted  in  the 
multi-color  mode: 


FUNCTION 

CHARACTER 

BIT  PAIR 

COLOR  DISPLAYED 

Background 

00 

Background  #0  Color 
(register  33  ($21)) 

Background 

01 

Background  #1  Color 
(register  34  ($22)) 

Foreground 

10 

Background  #2  Color 
(register  35  ($23)) 

Foreground 

1 1 

Color  specified  by  3 LSB 
of  color  nybble 

Since  two  bits  are  required  to  specify  one  dot  color,  the  character  is  now 
displayed  as  a 4 X 8 matrix  with  each  dot  twice  the  horizontal  size  as  in 
standard  mode.  Note,  however,  that  each  character  region  can  now 
contain  4 different  colors,  two  as  foreground  and  two  as  background 
(see  MOB  priority). 

EXTENDED  COLOR  MODE  (ECM  = 1,  BMM  = MCM  = 0) 

The  extended  color  mode  allows  the  selection  of  individual  back- 
ground colors  for  each  character  region  with  the  normal  8X8  character 
resolution.  This  mode  is  selected  by  setting  the  ECM  bit  of  register  17 
($11)  to  "1."  The  character  dot  data  is  displayed  as  in  the  standard 
mode  (foreground  color  determined  by  the  color  nybble  is  displayed  for 


438 


APPENDIX  N 


a "1"  data  bit),  but  the  2 MSB  of  the  character  pointer  are  used  to  select 
the  background  color  for  each  character  region  as  follows: 


CHAR.  POINTER 

MS  BIT  PAIR 

BACKGROUND  COLOR  DISPLAYED  FOR  0 BIT 

00 

Background  #0  color  (register  33  ($21)) 

01 

Background  #1  color  (register  34  ($22)) 

10 

Background  #2  color  (register  35  ($23)) 

1 1 

Background  #3  color  (register  36  ($24)) 

Since  the  two  MSB  of  the  character  pointers  are  used  for  color  informa- 
tion, only  64  different  character  definitions  are  available.  The  6566/6567 
will  force  CB10  and  CB9  to  "0"  regardless  of  the  original  pointer  values, 
so  that  only  the  first  64  character  definitions  will  be  accessed.  With  ex- 
tended color  mode  each  character  has  one  of  sixteen  individually  de- 
fined foreground  colors  and  one  of  the  four  available  background 
colors. 


NOTE:  Extended  color  mode  and  multi-color  mode  should  not  be  enabled 
simultaneously. 


BIT  MAP  MODE 

In  bit  map  mode,  the  6566/6567  fetches  data  from  memory  in  a dif- 
ferent fashion,  so  that  a one-to-one  correspondence  exists  between 
each  displayed  dot  and  a memory  bit.  The  bit  map  mode  provides  a 
screen  resolution  of  320H  X 200V  individually  controlled  display  dots. 
Bit  map  mode  is  selected  by  setting  the  B MM  bit  in  register  17  ($1 1)  to  a 
"1."  The  VIDEO  MATRIX  is  still  accessed  as  in  character  mode,  but  the 
video  matrix  data  is  no  longer  interpreted  as  character  pointers,  but 
rather  as  color  data.  The  VIDEO  MATRIX  COUNTER  is  then  also  used  as 
an  address  to  fetch  the  dot  data  for  display  from  the  8000-byte  DISPLAY 
BASE.  The  display  base  address  is  formed  as  follows: 


A13 

A12 

All 

A10 

A09 

A08 

A07 

A06 

A05 

A04 

A03 

A02 

A01 

A00 

CB13 

VC9 

VC8 

VC7 

VC6 

VC5 

VC4 

VC3 

VC2 

VC1 

VCO 

RC2 

RC1 

RC0 

APPENDIX  N 439 


i 


VCx  denotes  the  video  matrix  counter  outputs,  RCx  denotes  the  3-bit 
raster  line  counter  and  CB13  is  from  register  24  ($18).  The  video  matrix 
counter  steps  through  the  same  40  locations  for  eight  raster  lines,  con- 
tinuing to  the  next  40  locations  every  eighth  line,  while  the  raster  counter 
increments  once  for  each  horizontal  video  line  (raster  line).  This  address- 
ing results  in  each  eight  sequential  memory  locations  being  formatted  as 
an  8 X 8 dot  block  on  the  video  display. 


STANDARD  BIT  MAP  MODE  (BMM  =1,  MCM  = 0) 

When  standard  bit  map  mode  is  in  use,  the  color  information  is  de- 
rived only  from  the  data  stored  in  the  video  matrix  (the  color  nybble  is 
disregarded).  The  8 bits  are  divided  into  two  4-bit  nybbles  which  allow 
two  colors  to  be  independently  selected  in  each  8X8  dot  block.  When 
a bit  in  the  display  memory  is  a "0"  the  color  of  the  output  dot  is  set  by 
the  least  significant  (lower)  nybble  (LSN).  Similarly,  a display  memory  bit 
of  "1"  selects  the  output  color  determined  by  the  MSN  (upper  nybble). 


BIT 

DISPLAY  COLOR 

0 

Lower  nybble  of  video  matrix  pointer 

1 

Upper  nybble  of  video  matrix  pointer 

MULTI-COLOR  BIT  MAP  MODE  (BMM  = MCM  = 1) 

Multi-colored  bit  map  mode  is  selected  by  setting  the  MCM  bit  in 
register  22  ($16)  to  a "1"  in  conjunction  with  the  BMM  bit.  Multi-color 
mode  uses  the  same  memory  access  sequences  as  standard  bit  map 
mode,  but  interprets  the  dot  data  as  follows: 


BIT  PAIR 

DISPLAY  COLOR 

00 

Background  #0  color  (register  33  ($21)) 

01 

Upper  nybble  of  video  matrix  pointer 

10 

Lower  nybble  of  video  matrix  pointer 

11 

Video  matrix  color  nybble 

Note  that  the  color  nybble  (DB11-DB8)  IS  used  for  the  multi-color  bit 
map  mode.  Again,  as  two  bits  are  used  to  select  one  dot  color,  the 


440  APPENDIX  N 


horizontal  dot  size  is  doubled,  resulting  in  a screen  resolution  of  160H  X 
200V.  Utilizing  multi-color  bit  map  mode,  three  independently  selected 
colors  can  be  displayed  in  each  8X8  block  in  addition  to  the  back- 
ground color. 


MOVABLE  OBJECT  BLOCKS 

The  movable  object  block  (MOB)  is  a special  type  of  character  which 
can  be  displayed  at  any  one  position  on  the  screen  without  the  block 
constraints  inherent  in  character  and  bit  map  mode.  Up  to  8 unique 
MOBs  can  be  displayed  simultaneously,  each  defined  by  63  bytes  in 
memory  which  are  displayed  as  a 24X21  dot  array  (shown  below).  A 
number  of  special  features  make  MOBs  especially  suited  for  video 
graphics  and  game  applications. 


MOB  DISPLAY  BLOCK 


BYTE 

BYTE 

BYTE 

00 

01 

02 

03 

04 

05 

57 

58 

59 

60 

61 

62 

ENABLE 

Each  MOB  can  be  selectively  enabled  for  display  by  setting  its  corre- 
sponding enable  bit  (MnE)  to  "1"  in  register  21  ($15).  If  the  MnE  bit  is 
"0,"  no  MOB  operations  will  occur  involving  the  disabled  MOB. 

POSITION 

Each  MOB  is  positioned  via  its  X and  Y position  register  (see  register 
map)  with  a resolution  of  512  horizontal  and  256  vertical  positions.  The 


APPENDIX  N 441 


position  of  a MOB  is  determined  by  the  upper-left  corner  of  the  array.  X 
locations  23  to  347  ($17-$  157)  and  Y locations  50  to  249  ($32-$F9)  are 
visible.  Since  not  all  available  MOB  positions  are  entirely  visible  on  the 
screen,  MOBs  may  be  moved  smoothly  on  and  off  the  display  screen. 

COLOR 

Each  MOB  has  a separate  4-bit  register  to  determine  the  MOB  color. 
The  two  MOB  color  modes  are: 

STANDARD  MOB  (MnMC  = 0) 

In  the  standard  mode,  a "0"  bit  of  MOB  data  allows  any  background 
data  to  show  through  (transparent)  and  a "1"  bit  is  displayed  as  the 
MOB  color  determined  by  the  corresponding  MOB  Color  register. 

MULTI-COLOR  MOB  (MnMC  = 1) 

Each  MOB  can  be  individually  selected  as  a multi-color  MOB  via 
MnMC  bits  in  the  MOB  Multi-color  register  28  ($1C).  When  the  MnMC  bit 
is  " 1 ,"  the  corresponding  MOB  is  displayed  in  the  multi-color  mode.  In 
the  multi-color  mode,  the  MOB  data  is  interpreted  in  pairs  (similar  to  the 
other  multi-color  modes)  as  follows: 


BIT  PAIR 

COLOR  DISPLAYED 

00 

Transparent 

01 

MOB  Multi-color  #0  (register  37  ($25)) 

10 

MOB  Color  (registers  39-46  ($27-$2E)) 

11 

MOB  Multi-color  #1  (register  38  ($26)) 

Since  two  bits  of  data  are  required  for  each  color,  the  resolution  of  the 
MOB  is  reduced  to  12X21,  with  each  horizontal  dot  expanded  to  twice 
standard  size  so  that  the  overall  MOB  size  does  not  change.  Note  that 
up  to  3 colors  can  be  displayed  in  each  MOB  (in  addition  to  transparent) 
but  that  two  of  the  colors  are  shared  among  all  the  MOBs  in  the  multi- 
color mode. 


442 


APPENDIX  N 


MAGNIFICATION 


Each  MOB  can  be  selectively  expanded  (2X)  in  both  the  horizontal 
and  vertical  directions.  Two  registers  contain  the  control  bits 
(MnXE,MnYE)  for  the  magnification  control: 


REGISTER 

FUNCTION 

23  ($17) 
29  ($1  D) 

Horizontal  expand  MnXE — "l"  = expand;  "0"  = normal 
Vertical  expand  MnYE — "l"  = expand;  "O'^normal 

When  MOBs  are  expanded,  no  increase  in  resolution  is  realized.  The 
same  24X21  array  (12X21  if  multi-colored)  is  displayed,  but  the  overall 
MOB  dimension  is  doubled  in  the  desired  direction  (the  smallest  MOB 
dot  may  be  up  to  4X  standard  dot  dimension  if  a MOB  is  both  multi- 
colored and  expanded). 

PRIORITY 

The  priority  of  each  MOB  may  be  individually  controlled  with  respect 
to  the  other  displayed  information  from  character  or  bit  map  modes. 
The  priority  of  each  MOB  is  set  by  the  corresponding  bit  (MnDP)  of  regis- 
ter 27  ($1B)  as  follows: 

REG  BIT  PRIORITY  TO  CHARACTER  OR  BIT  MAP  DATA 

0 Non-transparent  MOB  data  will  be  displayed  (MOB  in  front) 

1 Non-transparent  MOB  data  will  be  displayed  only  instead  of 
Bkgd  #0  or  multi-color  bit  pair  01  (MOB  behind) 


MOB— DISPLAY  DATA  PRIORITY 


MnDP  = 1 

MnDP  = 0 

MOBn 

Foreground 

Background 

Foreground 

MOBn 

Background 

APPENDIX  N 


443 


MOB  data  bits  of  "0"  ("00"  in  multi-color  mode)  are  transparent,  always 
permitting  any  other  information  to  be  displayed. 

The  MOBs  have  a fixed  priority  with  respect  to  each  other,  with  MOB 
0 having  the  highest  priority  and  MOB  7 the  lowest.  When  MOB  data 
(except  transparent  data)  of  two  MOBs  are  coincident,  the  data  from 
the  lower  number  MOB  will  be  displayed.  MOB  vs.  MOB  data  is 
prioritized  before  priority  resolution  with  character  or  bit  map  data. 


COLLISION  DETECTION 


Two  types  of  MOB  collision  (coincidence)  are  detected,  MOB  to  MOB 
collision  and  MOB  to  display  data  collision: 


1)  A collision  between  two  MOBs  occurs  when  non-transparent  output 
data  of  two  MOBs  are  coincident.  Coincidence  of  MOB  transparent 
areas  will  not  generate  a collision.  When  a collision  occurs,  the 
MOB  bits  (MnM)  in  the  MOB-MOB  COLLISION  register  30  ($1E)  will 
be  set  to  "1"  for  both  colliding  MOBs.  As  a collision  between  two 
(or  more)  MOBs  occurs,  the  MOB— MOB  collision  bit  for  each  col- 
lided MOB  will  be  set.  The  collision  bits  remain  set  until  a read  of 
the  collision  register,  when  all  bits  are  automatically  cleared. 
MOBs  collisions  are  detected  even  if  positioned  off-screen. 

2)  The  second  type  of  collision  is  a MOB- DATA  collision  between  a 
MOB  and  foreground  display  data  from  the  character  or  bit  map 
modes.  The  MOB-DATA  COLLISION  register  31  ($1F)  has  a bit 
(MnD)  for  each  MOB  which  is  set  to  "1"  when  both  the  MOB  and 
non-background  display  data  are  coincident.  Again,  the  coinci- 
dence of  only  transparent  data  does  not  generate  a collision.  For 
special  applications,  the  display  data  from  the  0-1  multicolor  bit 
pair  also  does  not  cause  a collision.  This  feature  permits  their  use 
as  background  display  data  without  interfering  with  true  MOB  col- 
lisions. A MOB— DATA  collision  can  occur  off-screen  in  the  horizon- 
tal direction  if  actual  display  data  has  been  scrolled  to  an  off- 
screen position  (see  scrolling).  The  MOB- DATA  COLLISION  register 
also  automatically  clears  when  read. 


444  APPENDIX  N 


-r 


The  collision  interrupt  latches  are  set  whenever  the  first  bit  of  either 
register  is  set  to  "1 ."  Once  any  collision  bit  within  a register  is  set  high, 
subsequent  collisions  will  not  set  the  interrupt  latch  until  that  collision 
register  has  been  cleared  to  all  "Os"  by  a read. 

MOB  MEMORY  ACCESS 

The  data  for  each  MOB  is  stored  in  63  consecutive  bytes  of  memory. 
Each  block  of  MOB  data  is  defined  by  a MOB  pointer,  located  at  the 
end  of  the  VIDEO  MATRIX.  Only  1000  bytes  of  the  video  matrix  are  used 
in  the  normal  display  modes,  allowing  the  video  matrix  locations 
1016-1023  (VM  base  + $3F8  to  VM  base  + $3FF)  to  be  used  for  MOB 
pointers  0—7,  respectively.  The  eight-bit  MOB  pointer  from  the  video 
matrix  together  with  the  six  bits  from  the  MOB  byte  counter  (to  address 
63  bytes)  define  the  entire  14— bit  address  field: 


A13 

A12 

All 

A10 

A09 

A08 

A07 

A06 

A05 

A04 

A03 

A02 

A01 

A00 

MP7 

MP6 

MP5 

MP4 

MP3 

MP2 

MP1 

MP0 

MC5 

MC4 

MC3 

MC2 

MCI 

MC0 

Where  MPx  are  the  MOB  pointer  bits  from  the  video  matrix  and  MCx  are 
the  internally  generated  MOB  counter  bits.  The  MOB  pointers  are  read 
from  the  video  matrix  at  the  end  of  every  raster  line.  When  the  Y posi- 
tion register  of  a MOB  matches  the  current  raster  line  count,  the  actual 
fetches  of  MOB  data  begin.  Internal  counters  automatically  step  through 
the  63  bytes  of  MOB  data,  displaying  three  bytes  on  each  raster  line. 


OTHER  FEATURES 

SCREEN  BLANKING 

The  display  screen  may  be  blanked  by  setting  the  DEN  bit  in  register 
17  ($11)  to  a "0."  When  the  screen  is  blanked,  the  entire  screen  will  be 
filled  with  the  exterior  color  as  set  in  register  32  ($20).  When  blanking  is 
active,  only  transparent  (Phase  1)  memory  accesses  are  required,  per- 
mitting full  processor  utilization  of  the  system  bus.  MOB  data,  however, 
will  be  accessed  if  the  MOBs  are  not  also  disabled.  The  DEN  bit  must  be 
set  to  "1"  for  normal  video  display. 


APPENDIX  N 445 


T 


ROW/COLUMN  SELECT 


The  normal  display  consists  of  25  rows  of  40  characters  (or  character 
regions)  per  row.  For  special  display  purposes,  the  display  window  may 
be  reduced  to  24  rows  and  38  characters.  There  is  no  change  in  the 
format  of  the  displayed  information,  except  that  characters  (bits)  adja- 
cent to  the  exterior  border  area  will  now  be  covered  by  the  border.  The 
select  bits  operate  as  follows: 


RSEL 

NUMBER  OF  ROWS 

CSEL 

NUMBER  OF  COLUMNS 

0 

24  rows 

0 

38  columns 

1 

25  rows 

1 

40  columns 

The  RSEL  bit  is  in  register  17  ($1  1)  and  the  CSEL  bit  is  in  register  22  ($16). 
For  standard  display  the  larger  display  window  is  normally  used,  while 
the  smaller  display  window  is  normally  used  in  conjunction  with  scrolling. 


SCROLLING 

The  display  data  may  be  scrolled  up  to  one  entire  character  space  in 
both  the  horizontal  and  vertical  direction.  When  used  in  conjunction  with 
the  smaller  display  window  (above),  scrolling  can  be  used  to  create  a 
smooth  panning  motion  of  display  data  while  updating  the  system 
memory  only  when  a new  character  row  (or  column)  is  required.  Scroll- 
ing is  also  used  to  center  a fixed  display  within  the  display  window. 


BITS 

REGISTER 

FUNCTION 

X2,X1 ,X0 

22  ($16) 

Horizontal  Position 

Y2,Y1,Y0 

17  ($11) 

Vertical  Position 

LIGHT  PEN 

The  light  pen  input  latches  the  current  screen  position  into  a pair  of 
registers  (LPX,LPY)  on  a low-going  edge.  The  X position  register  19  ($13) 
will  contain  the  8 MSB  of  the  X position  at  the  time  of  transition.  Since 
the  X position  is  defined  by  a 512-state  counter  (9  bits)  resolution  to  2 
horizontal  dots  is  provided.  Similarly,  the  Y position  is  latched  to  its  reg- 


446  APPENDIX  N 


ister  20  ($14)  but  here  8 bits  provide  single  raster  resolution  within  the 
visible  display.  The  light  pen  latch  may  be  triggered  only  once  per 
frame,  and  subsequent  triggers  within  the  same  frame  will  have  no 
effect.  Therefore,  you  must  take  several  samples  before  turning  the  light 
pen  to  the  screen  (3  or  more  samples,  average),  depending  upon  the 
characteristics  of  your  light  pen. 


RASTER  REGISTER 

The  raster  register  is  a dual-function  register.  A read  of  the  raster 
register  18  ($12)  returns  the  lower  8 bits  of  the  current  raster  position 
(the  MSB-RC8  is  located  in  register  17  ($11)).  The  raster  register  can  be 
interrogated  to  implement  display  changes  outside  the  visible  area  to 
prevent  display  flicker.  The  visible  display  window  is  from  raster  51 
through  raster  251  ($033-$0FB).  A write  to  the  raster  bits  (including 
RC8)  is  latched  for  use  in  an  internal  raster  compare.  When  the  current 
raster  matches  the  written  value,  the  raster  interrupt  latch  is  set. 


INTERRUPT  REGISTER 

The  interrupt  register  shows  the  status  of  the  four  sources  of  interrupt. 
An  interrupt  latch  in  register  25  ($19)  is  set  to  "1"  when  an  interrupt 
source  has  generated  an  interrupt  request.  The  four  sources  of  interrupt 
are: 


LATCH 

BIT 

ENABLE 

BIT 

WHEN  SET 

IRST 

ERST 

Set  when  (raster  count)  = (stored  raster  count) 

IMDC 

EMDC 

Set  by  MOB- DATA  collision  register  (first  collision  only) 

IMMC 

EMMC 

Set  by  MOB-MOB  collision  register  (first  collision  only) 

ILP 

IRQ 

ELP 

Set  by  negative  transition  of  LP  input  (once  per  frame) 
Set  high  by  latch  set  and  enabled  (invert  of  IRQ / output) 

To  enable  an  interrupt  request  to  set  the  IRQ/  output  to  "0 /'  the  corre- 
sponding interrupt  enable  bit  in  register  26  ($1A)  must  be  set  to  "l." 
Once  an  interrupt  latch  has  been  set,  the  latch  may  be  cleared  only  by 
writing  a "1"  to  the  desired  latch  in  the  interrupt  register.  This  feature 
allows  selective  handling  of  video  interrupts  without  software  required  to 
"remember"  active  interrupts. 


APPENDIX  N 


447 


DYNAMIC  RAM  REFRESH 


A dynamic  ram  refresh  controller  is  built  in  to  the  6566/6567  devices. 
Five  8-bit  row  addresses  are  refreshed  every  raster  line.  This  rate 
guarantees  a maximum  delay  of  2.02  ms  between  the  refresh  of  any 
single  row  address  in  a 128  refresh  scheme.  (The  maximum  delay  is 
3.66  ms  in  a 256  address  refresh  scheme.)  This  refresh  is  totally  trans- 
parent to  the  system,  since  the  refresh  occurs  during  Phase  1 of  the 
system  clock.  The  6567  generates  both  RAS/  and  CAS/  which  are  nor- 
mally connected  directly  to  the  dynamic  rams.  RAS/  and  CAS/  are  gen- 
erated for  every  Phase  2 and  every  video  data  access  (including  refresh) 
so  that  external  clock  generation  is  not  required. 


THEORY  OF  OPERATION 

SYSTEM  INTERFACE 

The  6566/6567  video  controller  devices  interact  with  the  system  data 
bus  in  a special  way.  A 65XX  system  requires  the  system  buses  only 
during  the  Phase  2 (clock  high)  portion  of  the  cycle.  The  6566/656 7 de- 
vices take  advantage  of  this  feature  by  normally  accessing  system 
memory  during  the  Phase  1 (clock  low)  portion  of  the  clock  cycle.  There- 
fore, operations  such  as  character  data  fetches  and  memory  refresh  are 
totally  transparent  to  the  processor  and  do  not  reduce  the  processor 
throughput.  The  video  chips  provide  the  interface  control  signals  re- 
quired to  maintain  this  bus  sharing. 

The  video  devices  provide  the  signal  AEC  (address  enable  control) 
which  is  used  to  disable  the  processor  address  bus  drivers  allowing  the 
video  device  to  access  the  address  bus.  AEC  is  active  low  which  permits 
direct  connection  to  the  AEC  input  of  the  65XX  family.  The  AEC  signal  is 
normally  activated  during  Phase  1 so  that  processor  operation  is  not 
affected.  Because  of  this  bus  "sharing,"  all  memory  accesses  must  be 
completed  in  1/2  cycle.  Since  the  video  chips  provide  a 1-MHz  clock 
(which  must  be  used  as  system  Phase  2),  a memory  cycle  is  500  ns 
including  address  setup,  data  access  and,  data  setup  to  the  reading 
device. 

Certain  operations  of  the  6566/6567  require  data  at  a faster  rate  than 
available  by  reading  only  during  the  Phase  1 time;  specifically,  the  ac- 
cess of  character  pointers  from  the  video  matrix  and  the  fetch  of  MOB 
data.  Therefore,  the  processor  must  be  disabled  and  the  data  accessed 


448  APPENDIX  N 


during  the  Phase  2 clock.  This  is  accomplished  via  the  BA  (bus  available) 
signal.  The  BA  line  is  normally  high  but  is  brought  low  during  Phase  1 to 
indicate  that  the  video  chip  will  require  a Phase  2 data  access.  Three 
Phase-2  times  are  allowed  after  BA  low  for  the  processor  to  complete 
any  current  memory  accesses.  On  the  fourth  Phase  2 after  BA  low,  the 
AEC  signal  will  remain  low  during  Phase  2 as  the  video  chip  fetches 
data.  The  BA  line  is  normally  connected  to  the  RDY  input  of  a 65XX 
processor.  The  character  pointer  fetches  occur  every  eighth  raster  line 
during  the  display  window  and  require  40  consecutive  Phase  2 accesses 
to  fetch  the  video  matrix  pointers.  The  MOB  data  fetches  require  4 
memory  accesses  as  follows: 


PHASE 

DATA 

CONDITION 

1 

MOB  Pointer 

Every  raster 

2 

MOB  Byte  1 

Each  raster  while  MOB  is  displayed 

1 

MOB  Byte  2 

Each  raster  while  MOB  is  displayed 

2 

MOB  Byte  3 

Each  raster  while  MOB  is  displayed 

The  MOB  pointers  are  fetched  every  other  Phase  1 at  the  end  of  each 
raster  line.  As  required,  the  additional  cycles  are  used  for  MOB  data 
fetches.  Again,  all  necessary  bus  control  is  provided  by  the  6566/656 7 
devices. 

MEMORY  INTERFACE 

The  two  versions  of  the  video  interface  chip,  6566  and  6567,  differ  in 
address  output  configurations.  The  6566  has  thirteen  fully  decoded  ad- 
dresses for  direct  connection  to  the  system  address  bus.  The  6567  has 
multiplexed  addresses  for  direct  connection  to  64K  dynamic  RAMs.  Vpe 
least  significant  address  bits,  A06-A00,  are  present  on  A06— A00  while 
RAS / is  brought  low,  while  the  most  significant  bits,  A13— A08,  are  pres- 
ent on  A05-A00  while  CAS / is  brought  low.  The  pins  All— A07  on  the 
6567  are  static  address  outputs  to  allow  direct  connection  of  these  bits 
to  a conventional  16K  (2KX8)  ROM.  (The  lower  order  addresses  require 
external  latching.) 

PROCESSOR  INTERFACE 

Aside  from  the  special  memory  accesses  described  above,  the  6566/ 
6567  registers  can  be  accessed  similar  to  any  other  peripheral  device. 


APPENDIX  N 449 


The  following  processor  interface  signals  are  provided: 

DATA  BUS  (DB7-DB0) 

The  eight  data  bus  pins  are  the  bi-directional  data  port,  controlled  by 
CS/,  RW,  and  Phase  0.  The  data  bus  can  only  be  accessed  while  AEC 
and  Phase  0 are  high  and  CS/  is  low. 

CHIP  SELECT  (CS/) 

The  chip  select  pin,  CS/,  is  brought  low  to  enable  access  to  the  device 
registers  in  conjunction  with  the  address  and  RW  pins.  CS/  low  is  recog- 
nized only  while  AEC  and  Phase  0 are  high. 

READ/WRITE  (R/W) 

The  read/write  input,  R/W,  is  used  to  determine  the  direction  of  data 
transfer  on  the  data  bus,  in  conjunction  with  CS/.  When  R/W  is  high  ("l") 
data  is  transferred  from  the  selected  register  to  the  data  bus  output. 
When  R/W  is  low  ("0")  data  presented  on  the  data  bus  pins  is  loaded 
into  the  selected  register. 

ADDRESS  BUS  (A05-A00) 

The  lower  six  address  pins,  A5-A0,  are  bi-directional.  During  a pro- 
cessor read  or  write  of  the  video  device,  these  address  pins  are  inputs. 
The  data  on  the  address  inputs  selects  the  register  for  read  or  write  as 
defined  in  the  register  map. 

CLOCK  OUT  (PHO) 

The  clock  output,  Phase  0,  is  the  1-AAHz  clock  used  as  the  65XX  pro- 
cessor Phase  0 in.  All  system  bus  activity  is  referenced  to  this  clock.  The 
clock  frequency  is  generated  by  dividing  the  8-MHz  video  input  clock  by 
eight. 

INTERRUPTS  (IRQ/) 

The  interrupt  output,  IRQ/,  is  brought  low  when  an  enabled  source  of 
interrupt  occurs  within  the  device.  The  IRQ/  output  is  open  drain,  requir- 
ing an  external  pull-up  resistor. 


VIDEO  INTERFACE 

The  video  output  signal  from  the  6566/6567  consists  of  two  signals 
which  must  be  externally  mixed  together.  SYNC/LUM  output  contains  all 

450  APPENDIX  N 


T 


the  video  data,  including  horizontal  and  vertical  syncs,  as  well  as  the 
luminance  information  of  the  video  display.  SYNC/LUM  is  open  drain, 
requiring  an  external  pull-up  of  500  ohms.  The  COLOR  output  contains 
all  the  chrominance  information,  including  the  color  reference  burst  and 
the  color  of  all  display  data.  The  COLOR  output  is  open  source  and 
should  be  terminated  with  1000  ohms  to  ground.  After  appropriate  mix- 
ing of  these  two  signals,  the  resulting  signal  can  directly  drive  a video 
monitor  or  be  fed  to  a modulator  for  use  with  a standard  television. 


SUMMARY  OF  6566/6567  BUS  ACTIVITY 


AEC 

PH0 

cs/ 

R/W 

ACTION 

0 

0 

X 

X 

PHASE  1 FETCH,  REFRESH 

0 

1 

X 

X 

PHASE  2 FETCH  (PROCESSOR  OFF) 

1 

0 

X 

X 

NO  ACTION 

1 

1 

0 

0 

WRITE  TO  SELECTED  REGISTER 

1 

1 

0 

1 

READ  FROM  SELECTED  REGISTER 

1 

1 

1 

X 

NO  ACTION 

COLOR  CODES 


D4 

D3 

D1 

DO 

HEX 

DEC 

COLOR 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

BLACK 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

1 

WHITE 

0 

0 

1 

0 

2 

2 

RED 

0 

0 

1 

1 

3 

3 

CYAN 

0 

1 

0 

0 

4 

4 

PURPLE 

0 

1 

0 

1 

5 

5 

GREEN 

0 

1 

1 

0 

6 

6 

BLUE 

0 

1 

1 

1 

7 

7 

YELLOW 

1 

0 

0 

0 

8 

8 

ORANGE 

1 

0 

0 

1 

9 

9 

BROWN 

1 

0 

1 

0 

A 

10 

LT  RED 

1 

0 

1 

1 

B 

11 

DARK  GREY 

1 

1 

0 

0 

C 

12 

MED  GREY 

1 

1 

0 

1 

D 

13 

LT  GREEN 

1 

1 

1 

0 

E 

14 

LT  BLUE 

1 

1 

1 

1 

F 

15 

LT  GREY 

APPENDIX  N 451 


T 


PIN  CONFIGURATION 




DB6 

1 

40 

DB5 

2 

39 

db4 

3 

38 

db3 

4 

37 

db2 

5 

36 

DB-j 

6 

35 

DB0 

7 

34 

IRQ  / 

8 

33 

LP 

9 

32 

CS  / 

10 

6567 

31 

R/W 

11 

30 

BA 

12 

29 

VDD 

13 

28 

COLOR 

14 

27 

S/LUM 

15 

26 

AEC 

16 

25 

PH0 

17 

24 

RAS  / 

18 

23 

CAS/ 

19 

22 

VSS 

20 

21 

(Multiplexed  addresses  in  parentheses) 


VCC 

DB7 

db8 

DBg 

DB-,0 

DBn 

A10 

A9 

A8 

A7 

a6  (“1”) 
A5(Al3) 

A4<Ai2) 

A3(A1i) 

A2(aio) 

ai(a9) 

Ao(A8) 

A11 

PHIN 

PHCL 


452  APPENDIX  N 


PIN  CONFIGURATION 


db6 

db5 

db4 

db3 

db2 

DB, 

db0 

IRQ  / 

LP 

CS  / 

R/W 

BA 

VDD 

COLOR 

S/LUM 

AEC 

PH0 

PHIN 

PHCOL 

VSS 


v_y 

E 

40 

2 

39 

— 

3 

38 

4 

37 

5 

36 

6 

35 

7 

34 

8 

33 

9 

32 

6566 

10 

31 

11 

30 

12 

29 

13 

28 

14 

27 

15 

26 

16 

25 

17 

24 

18 

23 

19 

22 

20 

3 

VCC 

DB7 

db8 

DBg 

DB10 

□Bn 

A13 

A12 

A11 

A10 

A9 

A8 

A7 

A6 

A5 

A4 

A3 

A2 

A1 

A0 


APPENDIX  N 


1 


453 


ADDRESS  DB7  DB6  DB5  DB4  DB3  DB2  DB1  DBO  DESCRIPTION 


c 

c 

c 

c 

c 

c 

c 

c 

c 

c 

c 

c 

C 

c 

c 

c 

c 

o 

o 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

4- 

X 

4- 

X 

V 

X 

X 

X 

x 

X 

X 

*-* — 

X 

X 

+3 

CO 

10 

co 

"co 

"to 

"co 

"co 

"co 

CO 

"co 

CO 

co 

co 

* cO 

co 

co 

to 

O 

0 

O 

O 

0 

O 

O 

0 

O 

0 

O 

O 

O 

O 

0 

O 

O 

a 

0. 

a 

Ql 

Q. 

a 

a 

a. 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

a 

Q. 

1 ■*— 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

x 

X 

x 

X 

x 

X X 
^ 0 

o 

0 

«— 

— 

CM 

CM 

CO 

CO 

10 

10 

0 

0 

x 

IX 

H—  ■*“ 
° 0 
co  9? 

CD 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

co 

CO 

CO 

CO 

co 

CO 

o 

0 

0 

0 

O 

O 

0 

0 

0 

0 

O 

0 

O 

O 

O 

O 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

£ 

£ 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

% 

o 

0 

0 

0 

O 

O 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

CO 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

x 

X 

X 

X 0 

o 

< 

0 

< 

< 

<E 

CM 

< 

CM 

CO 

< 

CO 

<c 

c 

^r 

< 

10 

< 

LO 

< 

0 

< 

0 

< 

ix 

< 

>o 

< 

i > 

o 

O' 


X >- 


» g>0 


X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

>- 

X 

0 

0 

r— 

1— 

CM 

CM 

CO 

CO 

^r 

LO 

10 

0 

NO 

X 

X 

:> 

:> 

§ 

2 2 

:> 

£ 

% 

2 2 

:> 

i 

CN 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CM 

CM 

CN 

CM 

CM 

CN 

CM 

CM 

00 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

>- 

X 

> 

X 

0 

O 

r— 

r— 

CM 

CN 

CO 

CO 

10 

10 

0 

NO 

X 

X 

CN 

£ 

:> 

§ 

2 2 

:> 

£ 

:> 

:> 

:> 

£ 

£ 

:> 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

> 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

O 

0 

■ — 

r— 

CM 

CM 

CO 

CO 

^r 

uo 

10 

O 

<5 

X 

X 

CO 

£ 

:> 

£ 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

^r 

^r 

^r 

^r 

00 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

0 

0 

•— 

I— 

CM 

CN 

CO 

CO 

^r 

LO 

10 

O 

0 

X 

X 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

£ 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

lo 

LO 

10 

10 

LO 

LO 

10 

10 

10 

LO 

lO 

LO 

10 

10 

10 

uo 

00 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

> 

X 

> 

X 

>- 

X 

> 

X 

X 

X 

>- 

X 

0 

0 

r— 

r— 

CM 

CM 

CO 

CO 

10 

LO 

0 

0 

X 

X 

LO 

£ 

£ 

£ 

:> 

:> 

:> 

$ 

0 

0 

O 

0 

«o 

O 

0 

0 

0 

0 

O 

O 

0 

0 

0 

0 

CO 

X 

x 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

> 

X 

> 

X 

>- 

X 

>- 

X 

0 

0 

r— 

r— 

CN 

CN 

CO 

CO 

^r 

LO 

LO 

0 

0 

X 

X 

O 

£ 

£ 

:> 

:> 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

x 

X 

X 

CO 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

> 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

0 

0 

•— 

1— 

CM 

CN 

CO 

CO 

10 

10 

0 

0 

X 

X 

X 

£ 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

o 2 w 

X >-  o 

CL  CL  < 
— J —I  < 


?S  £ 


^ ^ X X 


u 

CL 


LLI  CO 


Q_  CL 


CO 


Z ^ 

LU  (J 
Q O' 


^ LU 

£ 5 


O lO 

X >- 

CL  CL 


^ ^ X 

u u £ 

LU  CL  _l 


<3  QJ 

£ 5 


CO  X 


5 LU 

u U £ ol  t 

^ Qi  u 13  ^ 


0 

— CN 

CO 

10 

O 

X 

CO 

0 

< 

CD 

U 

Cl 

LU 

LL 

0 

CN 

CO 

LO 

0 

O O 

O 

0 

0 

O 

0 

0 

0 

0 

O 

0 

0 

O 

O 

r— 

•faO- 

-bO 

y* 

y> 

yy 

y* 

■bO- 

y> 

b9- 

bO; 

y> 

bO- 

bO 

b9- 

bO 

bO- 

bO- 

bO 

N — ” 

0 

— CM 

CO 

LO 

0 

X 

CO 

0 

0 

, 

CM 

co 

in 

0 

X 

00 

0 

0 

0 

O O 

0 

0 

O 

0 

0 

0 

0 

•— 

CM 

CM 

454  APPENDIX  N 


22  ($16)  RES  MCM  CSEL  X2  XI  XO  See  text 

23  ($17)  M7YE  M6YE  M5YE  M4YE  M3  YE  M2YE  Ml  YE  MOYE  MOB  Y-expand 


0 

CO 


a 

D 


c _2  c o o 


o — 

o o o o _o  _o 


c o> 

i— 

i_ 

CL 

o 

o 

u 

u 

1. 

0 

0 

o o 

o 

o o 

o 

o 

*n  ^ 

0 

< 

u 

Q_ 

X 

CO 

< 

o 

u 

u u 

u 

u u 

3 

3 

C 

3 

0 

O 

& 

O 

o 

— CN 

CO 

3 3 

O 

U 

> Q. 
O D 

0 

Q 

£ 

X 

:> 

Q 

i_ 

o 

% ^ ^ 

:>  :> 

o 

E ^ 

JD 

CD 

CD 

CO 

CO 

CQ 

“0 

~o  ~a 

T3 

CO  CO 

CO 

CO 

0 £ 

O 

O 

O 

O 

o 

o 

0 

U) 

U)  U) 

O) 

o o 

O 

o 

:>  -E 

c 

LU 

:> 

:> 

:> 

X 

LU 

CO 

CO  CO 

CO 

:>  1 

:> 

U U U U U U 

<N  CO  ^ ID  sO  IV 

m m m m nn  rfl 

o o o o o o 

:>  :>  :>  :>  :>  :> 


1 

\— 

co 

ERST 

CL 

Q 

O 

U 

o 

LU 

X 

o 

O 

Q 

O 

ECO 

O 

u 

Q 

o 

u 

B2C0 

B3C0 

o 

o 

o 

5 

o 

u 

o 

o 

u 

o 

u 

CN 

O 

u 

CO 

o 

U 

o 

u 

uo 

o 

u 

o 

O 

u 

QC 

:> 

:> 

§ 

§ 

£ 

CO 

CO 

2 2 

:> 

5 

- 

U 

CO 

U 

CO 

CL 

Q 

o 

§ 

LU 

X 

2 

Q 

(J 

(J 

(j 

cj 

MM01 

MM  1 1 

u 

u 

u 

U 

U 

U 

u 

U 

CO 

U 

§ 

:> 

LU 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

u 

LU 

o 

CO 

CO 

CN 

CO 

CO 

CO 

o 

5 

CN 

CO 

uo 

o 

IV 

CN 

U 

u 

:> 

CL 

a 

u 

:> 

LU 

X 

:> 

Q 

CN 

CN 

(J 

CN 

(J 

CN 

u 

CN 

CN 

u 

CO 

CN 

o 

<r 

CN 

CN 

o 

CN 

u 

CN 

U 

CN 

U 

CN 

u 

CN 

U 

CN 

U 

CN 

U 

CO 

§ 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

u 

LU 

o 

o 

1— 

CN 

CO 

uo 

NO 

IV 

u 

LU 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

£ 

CO 

CO 

CQ 

CO 

2 2 

2 

2 2 

CO 

CL 

Q 

u 

:> 

LU 

X 

:> 

a 

EC3 

CO 

u 

o 

CO 

O 

CO 

(J 

CO 

u 

CO 

CO 

o 

<- 

CO 

<r" 

CO 

u 

CO 

U 

CO 

U 

CO 

U 

CO 

U 

CO 

u 

CO 

U 

CO 

U 

CO 

a. 

Q_ 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CN 

o 

t— 

CN 

CO 

uo 

o 

IV 

u 

— 1 

LU 

£ 

£ 

£ 

:> 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

2 

2 

:> 

% 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

o 

CL 

U 

LU 

. 

1 

Q 

X 

Q 

. 

1 

1 

• 

1 

■ 

1 

i 

i 

i 

■ 

i 

1 

i 

. 

i 

^r 

^r 

> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

£ 

l 

i 

1 

i 

Q_ 

u 

LU 

>— 

1 

I 

Q 

£ 

X 

£ 

Q 

i 

1 

1 

1 

1 

. 

• 

1 

. 

. 

. 

. 

1 

. 

i 

uo 

uo 

uo 

uo 

uo 

| 

> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

:> 

1 

i 

CN 

CL 

U 

LU 

. 

1 

a 

X 

Q 

i 

1 

1 

■ 

1 

| 

. 

. 

i 

i 

i 

i 

. 

i 

. 

5 

<5 

NO 

vO 

<5 

o 

| 

| 

> 

:> 

:> 

£ 

1 

1 

i 

CO 

CL 

U 

LU 

a 

1 

a 

X 

Q 

i 

1 

1 

1 

. 

■ 

1 

. 

1 

. 

. 

l 

1 

. 

5 

rv 

iv 

IV 

rv 

IV 

1 

> 

CL 

:> 

:> 

1 

i 

1 

1 

CO 

S' 

< 

S 

u 

Q 

LU 

s 

o 

CN 

CO 

3 

3 

R 

s 

(> 

< 

2 

U 

o 

LU 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

•b9 

co- 

*9 

<b9 

-b9 

*9 

*9 

*9 

*9 

</> 

09 

09 

-bO- 

•bO 

-bO- 

<=9; 

^9 

b9 

w’ 

' / 

v '' 

x~-' 

1 ' 

uo 

vO 

IV 

00 

O 

o 

, 

CN 

CO 

uo 

o 

IV 

CO 

O 

O 

CN 

CO 

uo 

O 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

APPENDIX  N 


i 


455 


NOTE:  A dash  indicates  a no  connect.  All  no  connects  are  read  as 


6567  TIMING  LIMITS 


SPEC 

SPEC 

MIN 

TYP 

SPEC 

MAX 

Clock  out  hi 

465 

484 

500 

Clock  out  lo 

475 

494 

510 

Clock  to  RAS  lo 

150 

171 

190 

Clock  to  RAS  hi 

20 

35 

50 

Ras  lo  to  CAS  lo 

25 

46 

65 

Clock  to  CAS  hi 

15 

25 

35 

Clock  to  AEC  hi/lo 

15 

33 

50 

Data  out  from  CAS 

184 

220 

Data  rel  from  PhO 

80 

113 

135 

Add-in  to  RAS  setup 

25 

14 

Add-in  to  RAS  hold 

0 

-15 

Add-out/RAS  setup 

35 

48 

Add-out/RAS  hold 

30 

36 

45 

Add-out  from  PhO 

85 

97 

Add-out/CASf  hid 

20 

37 

50 

BA  from  PhO 

100 

230 

300 

Data  in  setup/PhO 

60 

42 

Data  in  hold/PhO 

45 

24 

Color  data  setup 

45 

30 

Color  data  hold 

0 

-17 

Ph  in  + pulse 

50 

43 

Ph  in  — pulse 

65 

58 

Vil 

1.23 

0.80 

Vih 

2.20 

1.91 

Vol 

0.52 

0.55 

Voh 

2.40 

3.03 

456  APPENDIX  N 


APPENDIX  O 


6581  SOUND  INTERFACE  DEVICE  (SID) 
CHIP  SPECIFICATIONS 

CONCEPT 

The  6581  Sound  Interface  Device  (SID)  is  a single-chip,  3-voice  elec- 
tronic music  synthesizer/sound  effects  generator  compatible  with  the 
65XX  and  similar  microprocessor  families.  SID  provides  wide-range, 
high-resolution  control  of  pitch  (frequency),  tone  color  (harmonic  con- 
tent), and  dynamics  (volume).  Specialized  control  circuitry  minimizes 
software  overhead,  facilitating  use  in  arcade/home  video  games  and 
low-cost  musical  instruments. 


FEATURES 

• 3 TONE  OSCILLATORS 

Range:  0—4  kHz 

• 4 WAVEFORMS  PER  OSCILLATOR 

Triangle,  Sawtooth, 

Variable  Pulse,  Noise 

• 3 AMPLITUDE  MODULATORS 

Range:  48  dB 

• 3 ENVELOPE  GENERATORS 

Exponential  response 
Attack  Rate:  2 ms-8  s 
Decay  Rate:  6 ms  — 24  s 
Sustain  Level:  0— peak  volume 
Release  Rate:  6 ms— 24  s 

• OSCILLATOR  SYNCHRONIZATION 

• RING  MODULATION 


APPENDIX  O 457 


• PROGRAMMABLE  FILTER 

Cutoff  range:  30  Hz— 12  kHz 
12  dB/octave  Rolloff 
Low  pass.  Bandpass, 

High  pass.  Notch  outputs 
Variable  Resonance 

• MASTER  VOLUME  CONTROL 

• 2 A/D  POT  INTERFACES 

• RANDOM  NUMBER/MODULATION  GENERATOR 

• EXTERNAL  AUDIO  INPUT 


CAP1a 

cap1b 

cap2A 

cap2B 

RES 

02 

R/W 

CS 

A0 

Ai 

A2 

a3 

a4 

GND 


PIN  CONFIGURATION 


er 

1 

28 

VDD 

2 

27 

AUDIO  OUT 

3 

26 

EXTIN 

4 

25 

VCC 

5 

24 

POT  X 

6 

23 

POTY 

7 

6581 

SID 

22 

d7 

8 

21 

d6 

9 

20 

d5 

10 

19 

d4 

11 

18 

d3 

12 

17 

d2 

13 

16 

Di 

14 

15 

Do 

458  APPENDIX  O 


m 

CM 


CD  < 


3 

o 

o 

Q 

3 

< 


Z 


APPENDIX  O 


459 


6581  BLOCK  DIAGRAM 


DESCRIPTION 


The  6581  consists  of  three  synthesizer  "voices"  which  can  be  used 
independently  or  in  conjunction  with  each  other  (or  external  audio 
sources)  to  create  complex  sounds.  Each  voice  consists  of  a Tone 
Oscillator/Waveform  Generator,  an  Envelope  Generator  and  an 
Amplitude  Modulator.  The  Tone  Oscillator  controls  the  pitch  of  the  voice 
over  a wide  range.  The  Oscillator  produces  four  waveforms  at  the 
selected  frequency,  with  the  unique  harmonic  content  of  each  waveform 
providing  simple  control  of  tone  color.  The  volume  dynamics  of  the  oscil- 
lator are  controlled  by  the  Amplitude  Modulator  under  the  direction  of 
the  Envelope  Generator.  When  triggered,  the  Envelope  Generator 
creates  an  amplitude  envelope  with  programmable  rates  of  increasing 
and  decreasing  volume.  In  addition  to  the  three  voices,  a programm- 
able Filter  is  provided  for  generating  complex,  dynamic  tone  colors  via 
subtractive  synthesis. 

SID  allows  the  microprocessor  to  read  the  changing  output  of  the  third 
Oscillator  and  third  Envelope  Generator.  These  outputs  can  be  used  as  a 
source  of  modulation  information  for  creating  vibrato,  frequency/filter 
sweeps  and  similar  effects.  The  third  oscillator  can  also  act  as  a random 
number  generator  for  games.  Two  A/D  converters  are  provided  for  inter- 
facing SID  with  potentiometers.  These  can  be  used  for  "paddles"  in  a 
game  environment  or  as  front  panel  controls  in  a music  synthesizer.  SID 
can  process  external  audio  signals,  allowing  multiple  SID  chips  to  be 
daisy-chained  or  mixed  in  complex  polyphonic  systems. 


SID  CONTROL  REGISTERS 


There  are  29  eight-bit  registers  in  SID  which  control  the  generation  of 
sound.  These  registers  are  either  WRITE-only  or  READ-only  and  are  listed 
below  in  Table  1 . 


460  APPENDIX  O 


Table  1.  SID  Register  Map 


>>>>>>> 

z z z z z z z 


UJ  t 
C3  Q. 

UJ  > 


a:  DC  ir  dc  a:  oc 


>->>>->->>- 


ooooooo 

LU  LU  UJ 


O O 


O O O O O 

LLJ  LU  LLJ  LLJ  LLJ  UJ  LU 

t t t t t t t 

(E  IE  DC  DC  CC  DC  (E 


LL  LL  IL  U.  11  u-  IL  U-LLU-U-U-U-tJ- 

§555555  5555555 


>>>>>>>  > 

zzzzzzz  z 

ooooooo  o 

til  LLJ  LLJ  LLJ  LLJ  LLJ  LLJ 

t t t t t t t 

DC  DC  DC  DC  DC  DC  DC 

5 5 5 5 5 5 5 


DC  DC  E CC 

5 5 5 5 


*-  © a 

O LU 
UJ  O E 
CC  > LL 


3 x H 8 £ 


-Si 

» o o 


S O 


o 

Q x E 


,3  s 

© a o 


CL  a.  O < w > 


O * Z 


55otgo^5  5o 


CL  CL  O < CO 


U.  LU 

co  9 

LU  O 
CE  5 


o ^ N O 'f  U)  (D 
ooooooo 


O «-  O T-  o 


O O O O !-0»-0 


O O O -r- 


t-  O O T-  T-  O O 


1-  O O O O T-  T-  o 


O T-  O 


O O o 


o o o o *- 


r-  O O O O »- 


ooooooo 


O 1-  T-  T- 


»-  o o o o 


o o o t- 


ooooooo 


ooooooo 


O t-  1-  T- 


o >-  n n 't  © 


03  o.  o ; Jl  n 5 « 


APPENDIX  O 461 


POT  Y READ-ONLY 

OSC3/RANDOM  READ-ONLY 

ENV3  READ-ONLY 


SID  REGISTER  DESCRIPTION 

VOICE  1 

FREQ  LO/FREQ  HI  (Registers  00,01) 

Together  these  registers  form  a 16-bit  number  which  linearly  controls 
the  frequency  of  Oscillator  1 . The  frequency  is  determined  by  the  follow- 
ing equation: 


Fout  = (Fn  X Fclk/l  677721 6)  Hz 

Where  Fn  is  the  16-bit  number  in  the  Frequency  registers  and  Fc!k  is  the 
system  clock  applied  to  the  (f) 2 input  (pin  6).  For  a standard  1.0-MHz 
clock,  the  frequency  is  given  by: 

Fout  = (Fn  X 0.059604645)  Hz 

A complete  table  of  values  for  generating  8 octaves  of  the  equally 
tempered  musical  scale  with  concert  A (440  Hz)  tuning  is  provided  in 
Appendix  E.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  frequency  resolution  of  SID  is 
sufficient  for  any  tuning  scale  and  allows  sweeping  from  note  to  note 
(portamento)  with  no  discernable  frequency  steps. 

PW  LO/PW  HI  (Registers  02,03) 

Together  these  registers  form  a 12-bit  number  (bits  4-7  of  PW  HI  are 
not  used)  which  linearly  controls  the  Pulse  Width  (duty  cycle)  of  the  Pulse 
waveform  on  Oscillator  1 . The  pulse  width  is  determined  by  the  follow- 
ing equation: 


PWout  = (PWn/40.95)  % 

Where  PWn  is  the  12-bit  number  in  the  Pulse  Width  registers. 

The  pulse  width  resolution  allows  the  width  to  be  smoothly  swept  with 
no  discernable  stepping.  Note  that  the  Pulse  waveform  on  Oscillator  1 
must  be  selected  in  order  for  the  Pulse  Width  registers  to  have  any  au- 
dible effect.  A value  of  0 or  4095  ($FF)  in  the  Pulse  Width  registers  will 
produce  a constant  DC  output,  while  a value  of  2048  ($800)  will  produce 
a square  wave. 


462  APPENDIX  O 


T 


CONTROL  REGISTER  (Register  04) 


This  register  contains  eight  control  bits  which  select  various  options  on 
Oscillator  1 . 

GATE  (Bit  0):  The  GATE  bit  controls  the  Envelope  Generator  for  Voice 
1 . When  this  bit  is  set  to  a one,  the  Envelope  Generator  is  Gated 
(triggered)  and  the  ATTACK/ DECAY/SUSTAIN  cycle  is  initiated.  When  the 
bit  is  reset  to  a zero,  the  RELEASE  cycle  begins.  The  Envelope  Generator 
controls  the  amplitude  of  Oscillator  1 appearing  at  the  audio  output, 
therefore,  the  GATE  bit  must  be  set  (along  with  suitable  envelope  pa- 
rameters) for  the  selected  output  of  Oscillator  1 to  be  audible.  A de- 
tailed discussion  of  the  Envelope  Generator  can  be  found  at  the  end  of 
this  Appendix. 

SYNC  (Bit  1 The  SYNC  bit,  when  set  to  a one,  synchronizes  the 
fundamental  frequency  of  Oscillator  1 with  the  fundamental  frequency 
of  Oscillator  3,  producing  "Hard  Sync"  effects. 

Varying  the  frequency  of  Oscillator  1 with  respect  to  Oscillator  3 pro- 
duces a wide  range  of  complex  harmonic  structures  from  Voice  1 at  the 
frequency  of  Oscillator  3.  In  order  for  sync  to  occur,  Oscillator  3 must  be 
set  to  some  frequency  other  than  zero  but  preferably  lower  than  the 
frequency  of  Oscillator  1.  No  other  parameters  of  Voice  3 have  any 
effect  on  sync. 

RING  MOD  (Bit  2):  The  RING  MOD  bit,  when  set  to  a one,  replaces 
the  Triangle  waveform  output  of  Oscillator  1 with  a "Ring  Modulated" 
combination  of  Oscillators  1 and  3.  Varying  the  frequency  of  Oscillator  1 
with  respect  to  Oscillator  3 produces  a wide  range  of  non-harmonic 
overtone  structures  for  creating  bell  or  gong  sounds  and  for  special  ef- 
fects. In  order  for  ring  modulation  to  be  audible,  the  Triangle  waveform 
of  Oscillator  1 must  be  selected  and  Oscillator  3 must  be  set  to  some 
frequency  other  than  zero.  No  other  parameters  of  Voice  3 have  any 
effect  on  ring  modulation. 

TEST  (Bit  3):  The  TEST  bit,  when  set  to  a one,  resets  and  locks  Oscil- 
lator 1 at  zero  until  the  TEST  bit  is  cleared.  The  Noise  waveform  output 
of  Oscillator  1 is  also  reset  and  the  Pulse  waveform  output  is  held  at  a 
DC  level.  Normally  this  bit  is  used  for  testing  purposes,  however,  it  can 
be  used  to  synchronize  Oscillator  1 to  external  events,  allowing  the 
generation  of  highly  complex  waveforms  under  real-time  software  con- 
trol. 


APPENDIX  O 


463 


(Bit  4):  When  set  to  a one,  the  Triangle  waveform  output  of  Oscillator 
1 is  selected.  The  Triangle  waveform  is  low  in  harmonics  and  has  a 
mellow,  flute-like  quality. 

(Bit  5):  When  set  to  a one,  the  Sawtooth  waveform  output  of  Oscil- 
lator 1 is  selected.  The  Sawtooth  waveform  is  rich  in  even  and  odd 
harmonics  and  has  a bright,  brassy  quality. 

(Bit  6):  When  set  to  a one,  the  Pulse  waveform  output  of  Oscillator  1 
is  selected.  The  harmonic  content  of  this  waveform  can  be  adjusted  by 
the  Pulse  Width  registers,  producing  tone  qualities  ranging  from  a 
bright,  hollow  square  wave  to  a nasal,  reedy  pulse.  Sweeping  the  pulse 
width  in  real-time  produces  a dynamic  "phasing"  effect  which  adds  a 
sense  of  motion  to  the  sound.  Rapidly  jumping  between  different  pulse 
widths  can  produce  interesting  harmonic  sequences. 

NOISE  (Bit  7):  When  set  to  a one,  the  Noise  output  waveform  of 
Oscillator  1 is  selected.  This  output  is  a random  signal  which  changes  at 
the  frequency  of  Oscillator  1.  The  sound  quality  can  be  varied  from  a 
low  rumbling  to  hissing  white  noise  via  the  Oscillator  1 Frequency  regis- 
ters. Noise  is  useful  in  creating  explosions,  gunshots,  jet  engines,  wind, 
surf  and  other  unpitched  sounds,  as  well  as  snare  drums  and  cymbals. 
Sweeping  the  oscillator  frequency  with  Noise  selected  produces  a dra- 
matic rushing  effect. 

One  of  the  output  waveforms  must  be  selected  for  Oscillator  1 to  be 
audible,  however,  it  is  NOT  necessary  to  de-select  waveforms  to  silence 
the  output  of  Voice  1 . The  amplitude  of  Voice  1 at  the  final  output  is  a 
function  of  the  Envelope  Generator  only. 


NOTE:  The  oscillator  output  waveforms  are  NOT  additive.  If  more  than  one  output 
waveform  is  selected  simultaneously,  the  result  will  be  a logical  ANDing  of  the 
waveforms.  Although  this  technique  can  be  used  to  generate  additional  waveforms 
beyond  the  four  listed  above,  it  must  be  used  with  care.  If  any  other  waveform  is 
selected  while  Noise  is  on,  the  Noise  output  can  "lock  up."  If  this  occurs,  the  Noise 
output  will  remain  silent  until  reset  by  the  TEST  bit  or  by  bringing  RES  (pin  5)  low. 


464  APPENDIX  O 


ATTACK/DECAY  (Register  05) 


Bits  4—7  of  this  register  (ATKO— ATK3)  select  1 of  16  ATTACK  rates  for 
the  Voice  1 Envelope  Generator.  The  ATTACK  rate  determines  how 
rapidly  the  output  of  Voice  1 rises  from  zero  to  peak  amplitude  when  the 
Envelope  Generator  is  Gated.  The  16  ATTACK  rates  are  listed  in  Table  2. 

Bits  0-3  (DCY0-DCY3)  select  1 of  16  DECAY  rates  for  the  Envelope 
Generator.  The  DECAY  cycle  follows  the  ATTACK  cycle  and  the  DECAY 
rate  determines  how  rapidly  the  output  falls  from  the  peak  amplitude  to 
the  selected  SUSTAIN  level.  The  16  DECAY  rates  are  listed  in  Table  2. 

SUSTAIN/RELEASE  (Register  06) 

Bits  4—7  of  this  register  (STNO— STN3)  select  1 of  16  SUSTAIN  levels  for 
the  Envelope  Generator.  The  SUSTAIN  cycle  follows  the  DECAY  cycle  and 
the  output  of  Voice  1 will  remain  at  the  selected  SUSTAIN  amplitude  as 
long  as  the  Gate  bit  remains  set.  The  SUSTAIN  levels  range  from  zero  to 
peak  amplitude  in  16  linear  steps,  with  a SUSTAIN  value  of  0 selecting 
zero  amplitude  and  a SUSTAIN  value  of  15  ($F)  selecting  the  peak 
amplitude.  A SUSTAIN  value  of  8 would  cause  Voice  1 to  SUSTAIN  at  an 
amplitude  one-half  the  peak  amplitude  reached  by  the  ATTACK  cycle. 

Bits  0-3  (RLS0-RLS3)  select  1 of  16  RELEASE  rates  for  the  Envelope 
Generator.  The  RELEASE  cycle  follows  the  SUSTAIN  cycle  when  the  Gate 
bit  is  reset  to  zero.  At  this  time,  the  output  of  Voice  1 will  fall  from  the 
SUSTAIN  amplitude  to  zero  amplitude  at  the  selected  RELEASE  rate.  The 
16  RELEASE  rates  are  identical  to  the  DECAY  rates. 


NOTE;  The  cycling  of  the  Envelope  Generator  can  be  altered  at  any  point  via  the  Gate 
bit.  The  Envelope  Generator  can  be  Gated  and  Released  without  restriction.  For 
example,  if  the  Gate  bit  is  reset  before  the  envelope  has  finished  the  ATTACK  cycle, 
the  RELEASE  cycle  will  immediately  begin,  starting  from  whatever  amplitude  had 
been  reached.  If  the  envelope  is  then  Gated  again  (before  the  RELEASE  cycle  has 
reached  zero  amplitude),  another  ATTACK  cycle  will  begin,  starting  from  whatever 
amplitude  had  been  reached.  This  technique  can  be  used  to  generate  complex 
amplitude  envelopes  via  real-time  software  control. 


APPENDIX  O 


465 


Table  2.  Envelope  Rates 


VALUE 

ATTACK 

RATE 

DECAY/RELEASE  RATE 

DEC  (HEX) 

(Time/Cycle) 

(Time/Cycle) 

0 

(0) 

2 

ms 

6 

ms 

1 

(1) 

8 

ms 

24 

ms 

2 

(2) 

16 

ms 

48 

ms 

3 

(3) 

24 

ms 

72 

ms 

4 

(4) 

38 

ms 

114 

ms 

5 

(5) 

56 

ms 

168 

ms 

6 

(6) 

68 

ms 

204 

ms 

7 

(7) 

80 

ms 

240 

ms 

8 

(8) 

100 

ms 

300 

ms 

9 

(9) 

250 

ms 

750 

ms 

10 

(A) 

500 

ms 

1. 

5 s 

11 

(B) 

800 

ms 

2. 

4 s 

12 

(C) 

1 s 

3 s 

13 

(D) 

3 s 

9 s 

14 

(E) 

5 s 

1 

5 s 

15 

(F) 

8 s 

24  s 

NOTE;  Envelope  rates  are  based  on  a 1.0-MHz  02  clock.  For  other  02  frequencies, 
multiply  the  given  rate  by  1 MHz/02.  The  rates  refer  to  the  amount  of  time  per  cycle. 
For  example,  given  an  ATTACK  value  of  2,  the  ATTACK  cycle  would  take  16  ms  to  rise 
from  zero  to  peak  amplitude.  The  DECAY/RELEASE  rates  refer  to  the  amount  of  time 
these  cycles  would  take  to  fall  from  peak  amplitude  to  zero. 


VOICE  2 


Registers  07— $0D  control  Voice  2 and  are  functionally  identical  to  reg- 
isters 00-06  with  these  exceptions: 


1)  When  selected,  SYNC  synchronizes  Oscillator  2 with  Oscillator  1. 

2)  When  selected,  RING  MOD  replaces  the  Triangle  output  of  Oscil- 
lator 2 with  the  ring  modulated  combination  of  Oscillators  2 and  1 . 


466  APPENDIX  O 


VOICE  3 


Registers  $0E-$14  control  Voice  3 and  are  functionally  identical  to 
registers  00—06  with  these  exceptions: 

1)  When  selected,  SYNC  synchronizes  Oscillator  3 with  Oscillator  2. 

2)  When  selected,  RING  MOD  replaces  the  Triangle  output  of  Oscil- 
lator 3 with  the  ring  modulated  combination  of  Oscillators  3 and  2. 

Typical  operation  of  a voice  consists  of  selecting  the  desired  parame- 
ters: frequency,  waveform,  effects  (SYNC,  RING  MOD)  and  envelope 
rates,  then  gating  the  voice  whenever  the  sound  is  desired.  The  sound 
can  be  sustained  for  any  length  of  time  and  terminated  by  clearing  the 
Gate  bit.  Each  voice  can  be  used  separately,  with  independent  parame- 
ters and  gating,  or  in  unison  to  create  a single,  powerful  voice.  When 
used  in  unison,  a slight  detuning  of  each  oscillator  or  tuning  to  musical 
intervals  creates  a rich,  animated  sound. 

FILTER 

FC  LO/FC  HI  (Registers  $15,$  16) 

Together  these  registers  form  an  1 1-bit  number  (bits  3 — 7 of  FC  LO  are 
not  used)  which  linearly  controls  the  Cutoff  (or  Center)  Frequency  of  the 
programmable  Filter.  The  approximate  Cutoff  Frequency  ranges  from  30 
Hz  to  12  KHz. 

RES/FILT  (Register  $17) 

Bits  4-7  of  this  register  (RES0-RES3)  control  the  resonance  of  the 
filter.  Resonance  is  a peaking  effect  which  emphasizes  frequency  com- 
ponents at  the  Cutoff  Frequency  of  the  Filter,  causing  a sharper  sound. 
There  are  16  resonance  settings  ranging  linearly  from  no  resonance  (0) 
to  maximum  resonance  (15  or  $F).  Bits  0—3  determine  which  signals  will 
be  routed  through  the  Filter: 

FILT  1 (Bit  0):  When  set  to  a zero,  Voice  1 appears  directly  at  the 
audio  output  and  the  Filter  has  no  effect  on  it.  When  set  to  a one.  Voice 
1 will  be  processed  through  the  Filter  and  the  harmonic  content  of  Voice 
1 will  be  altered  according  to  the  selected  Filter  parameters. 

Fill  2 (Bit  1):  Same  as  bit  0 for  Voice  2. 

FILT  3 (Bit  2):  Same  as  bit  0 for  Voice  3. 

FILTEX  (Bit  3):  Same  as  bit  0 for  External  audio  input  (pin  26). 

APPENDIX  O 467 


~r 


MODE/VOL  (Register  $18) 

Bits  4—7  of  this  register  select  various  Filter  mode  and  output  options: 

LP  (Bit  4):  When  set  to  a one,  the  Low-Pass  output  of  the  Filter  is 
selected  and  sent  to  the  audio  output.  For  a given  Filter  input  signal,  all 
frequency  components  below  the  Filter  Cutoff  Frequency  are  passed 
unaltered,  while  all  frequency  components  above  the  Cutoff  are  at- 
tenuated at  a rate  of  12  dB/Octave.  The  Low-Pass  mode  produces  full- 
bodied  sounds. 

BP  (Bit  5):  Same  as  bit  4 for  the  Bandpass  output.  All  frequency 
components  above  and  below  the  Cutoff  are  attenuated  at  a rate  of  6 
dB/Octave.  The  Bandpass  mode  produces  thin,  open  sounds. 

HP  (Bit  6):  Same  as  bit  4 for  the  High-Pass  output.  All  frequency 
components  above  the  Cutoff  are  passed  unaltered,  while  all  frequency 
components  below  the  Cutoff  are  attenuated  at  a rate  of  12  dB/Octave. 
The  High-Pass  mode  produces  tinny,  buzzy  sounds. 

3 OFF  (Bit  7):  When  set  to  a one,  the  output  of  Voice  3 is  disconnected 
from  the  direct  audio  path.  Setting  Voice  3 to  bypass  the  Filter  (FILT  3 = 
0)  and  setting  3 OFF  to  a one  prevents  Voice  3 from  reaching  the  audio 
output.  This  allows  Voice  3 to  be  used  for  modulation  purposes  without 
any  undesirable  output. 


NOTE:  The  Filter  output  modes  ARE  additive  and  multiple  Filter  modes  may  be 
selected  simultaneously.  For  example,  both  LP  and  HP  modes  can  be  selected  to 
produce  a Notch  (or  Band  Reject)  Filter  response.  In  order  for  the  Filter  to  have  any 
audible  effect,  at  least  one  Filter  output  must  be  selected  and  at  least  one  Voice  must 
be  routed  through  the  Filter.  The  Filter  is,  perhaps,  the  most  important  element  in  SID 
as  it  allows  the  generation  of  complex  tone  colors  via  subtractive  synthesis  (the  Filter 
is  used  to  eliminate  specific  frequency  components  from  a harmonically  rich  input 
signal).  The  best  results  are  achieved  by  varying  the  Cutoff  Frequency  in  real-time. 


Bits  0-3  (VOLO-VOL3)  select  1 of  16  overall  Volume  levels  for  the 
final  composite  audio  output.  The  output  volume  levels  range  from  no 
output  (0)  to  maximum  volume  (15  or  $F)  in  16  linear  steps.  This  control 
can  be  used  as  a static  volume  control  for  balancing  levels  in  multi-chip 
systems  or  for  creating  dynamic  volume  effects,  such  as  Tremolo.  Some 
Volume  level  other  than  zero  must  be  selected  in  order  for  SID  to  pro- 
duce any  sound. 


468  APPENDIX  O 


MISCELLANEOUS 

POTX  (Register  $19) 

This  register  allows  the  microprocessor  to  read  the  position  of  the 
potentiometer  tied  to  POTX  (pin  24),  with  values  ranging  from  0 at 
minimum  resistance,  to  255  ($FF)  at  maximum  resistance.  The  value  is 
always  valid  and  is  updated  every  512  (f> 2 clock  cycles.  See  the  Pin 
Description  section  for  information  on  pot  and  capacitor  values. 

POTY  (Register  $1A) 

Same  as  POTX  for  the  pot  tied  to  POTY  (pin  23). 

OSC  3/RANDOM  (Register  $1B) 

This  register  allows  the  microprocessor  to  read  the  upper  8 output  bits 
of  Oscillator  3.  The  character  of  the  numbers  generated  is  directly  re- 
lated to  the  waveform  selected.  If  the  Sawtooth  waveform  of  Oscillator 
3 is  selected,  this  register  will  present  a series  of  numbers  incrementing 
from  0 to  255  ($FF)  at  a rate  determined  by  the  frequency  of  Oscillator 
3.  If  the  Triangle  waveform  is  selected,  the  output  will  increment  from  0 
up  to  255,  then  decrement  down  to  0.  If  the  Pulse  waveform  is  selected, 
the  output  will  jump  between  0 and  255.  Selecting  the  Noise  waveform 
will  produce  a series  of  random  numbers,  therefore,  this  register  can  be 
used  as  a random  number  generator  for  games.  There  are  numerous 
timing  and  sequencing  applications  for  the  OSC  3 register,  however,  the 
chief  function  is  probably  that  of  a modulation  generator.  The  numbers 
generated  by  this  register  can  be  added,  via  software,  to  the  Oscillator 
or  Filter  Frequency  registers  or  the  Pulse  Width  registers  in  real-time. 
Many  dynamic  effects  can  be  generated  in  this  manner.  Siren-like 
sounds  can  be  created  by  adding  the  OSC  3 Sawtooth  output  to  the 
frequency  control  of  another  oscillator.  Synthesizer  "Sample  and  Hold" 
effects  can  be  produced  by  adding  the  OSC  3 Noise  output  to  the  Filter 
Frequency  control  registers.  Vibrato  can  be  produced  by  setting  Oscil- 
lator 3 to  a frequency  around  7 Hz  and  adding  the  OSC  3 Triangle 
output  (with  proper  scaling)  to  the  Frequency  control  of  another  oscil- 
lator. An  unlimited  range  of  effects  are  available  by  altering  the  fre- 
quency of  Oscillator  3 and  scaling  the  OSC  3 output.  Normally,  when 
Oscillator  3 is  used  for  modulation,  the  audio  output  of  Voice  3 should 
be  eliminated  (3  OFF  = 1). 


APPENDIX  O 469 


T 


ENV  3 (Register  $1C) 


Same  as  OSC  3,  but  this  register  allows  the  microprocessor  to  read 
the  output  of  the  Voice  3 Envelope  Generator.  This  output  can  be  added 
to  the  Filter  Frequency  to  produce  harmonic  envelopes,  WAH-WAH,  and 
similar  effects.  "Phaser"  sounds  can  be  created  by  adding  this  output  to 
the  frequency  control  registers  of  an  oscillator.  The  Voice  3 Envelope 
Generator  must  be  Gated  in  order  to  produce  any  output  from  this  regis- 
ter. The  OSC  3 register,  however,  always  reflects  the  changing  output  of 
the  oscillator  and  is  not  affected  in  any  way  by  the  Envelope  Generator. 


SID  PIN  DESCRIPTION 

CAPl  A,CAP1  B,  (Pins  1,2)/  CAP2A,CAP2B  (Pins  3,4) 

These  pins  are  used  to  connect  the  two  integrating  capacitors  re- 
quired by  the  programmable  Filter.  Cl  connects  between  pins  1 and  2, 
C2  between  pins  3 and  4.  Both  capacitors  should  be  the  same  value. 
Normal  operation  of  the  Filter  over  the  audio  range  (approximately  30 
Hz— 12  kHz)  is  accomplished  with  a value  of  2200  pF  for  Cl  and  C2. 
Polystyrene  capacitors  are  preferred  and  in  complex  polyphonic  sys- 
tems, where  many  SID  chips  must  track  each  other,  matched  capacitors 
are  recommended. 

The  frequency  range  of  the  Filter  can  be  tailored  to  specific  applica- 
tions by  the  choice  of  capacitor  values.  For  example,  a low-cost  game 
may  not  require  full  high-frequency  response.  In  this  case,  larger  values 
for  Cl  and  C2  could  be  chosen  to  provide  more  control  over  the  bass 
frequencies  of  the  Filter.  The  maximum  Cutoff  Frequency  of  the  Filter  is 
given  by: 


FCmax  = 2.6E-5/C 

Where  C is  the  capacitor  value.  The  range  of  the  Filter  extends  9 octaves 
below  the  maximum  Cutoff  Frequency. 

RES  (Pin  5) 

This  TTL-level  input  is  the  reset  control  for  SID.  When  brought  low  for 
at  least  ten  (/> 2 cycles,  all  internal  registers  are  reset  to  zero  and  the 
audio  output  is  silenced.  This  pin  is  normally  connected  to  the  reset  line 
of  the  microprocessor  or  a power-on-clear  circuit. 


470 


APPENDIX  O 


02  (Pin  6) 


This  TTL-level  input  is  the  master  clock  for  SID.  All  oscillator  frequen- 
cies and  envelope  rates  are  referenced  to  this  clock.  02  also  controls 
data  transfers  between  SID  and  the  microprocessor.  Data  can  only  be 
transferred  when  02  is  high.  Essentially,  02  acts  as  a high-active  chip 
select  as  far  as  data  transfers  are  concerned.  This  pin  is  normally  con- 
nected to  the  system  clock,  with  a nominal  operating  frequency  of  1.0 
MHz. 

R/W  (Pin  7) 

This  TTL-level  input  controls  the  direction  of  data  transfers  between 
SID  and  the  microprocessor.  If  the  chip  select  conditions  have  been  met, 
a high  on  this  line  allows  the  microprocessor  to  Read  data  from  the 
selected  SID  register  and  a low  allows  the  microprocessor  to  Write  data 
into  the  selected  SID  register.  This  pin  is  normally  connected  to  the  sys- 
tem Read/Write  line. 

CS  (Pin  8) 

This  TTL-level  input  is  a low  active  chip  select  which  controls  data 
transfers  between  SID  and  the  microprocessor.  CS  must  be  low  for  any 
transfer.  A Read  from  the  selected  SID  register  can  only  occur  if  CS  is 
low,  02  is  high  and  R/W  is  high.  A Write  to  the  selected  SID  register  can 
only  occur  if  CS  is  low,  02  is  high  and  R/W  is  low.  This  pin  is  normally 
connected  to  address  decoding  circuitry,  allowing  SID  to  reside  in  the 
memory  map  of  a system. 

A0-A4  (Pins  9-13) 

These  TTL-level  inputs  are  used  to  select  one  of  the  29  SID  registers. 
Although  enough  addresses  are  provided  to  select  1 of  32  registers,  the 
remaining  three  register  locations  are  not  used.  A Write  to  any  of  these 
three  locations  is  ignored  and  a Read  returns  invalid  data.  These  pins 
are  normally  connected  to  the  corresponding  address  lines  of  the  mi- 
croprocessor so  that  SID  may  be  addressed  in  the  same  manner  as 
memory. 

GND  (Pin  14) 

For  best  results,  the  ground  line  between  SID  and  the  power  supply 
should  be  separate  from  ground  lines  to  other  digital  circuitry.  This  will 
minimize  digital  noise  at  the  audio  output. 


APPENDIX  O 


471 


D0-D7  (Pins  15-22) 

These  bidirectional  lines  are  used  to  transfer  data  between  SID  and 
the  microprocessor.  They  are  TTL  compatible  in  the  input  mode  and  ca- 
pable of  driving  2 TTL  loads  in  the  output  mode.  The  data  buffers  are 
usually  in  the  high-impedance  off  state.  During  a Write  operation,  the 
data  buffers  remain  in  the  off  (input)  state  and  the  microprocessor 
supplies  data  to  SID  over  these  lines.  During  a Read  operation,  the  data 
buffers  turn  on  and  SID  supplies  data  to  the  microprocessor  over  these 
lines.  The  pins  are  normally  connected  to  the  corresponding  data  lines  of 
the  microprocessor. 

POTX,POTY  (Pins  24,23) 

These  pins  are  inputs  to  the  A/D  converters  used  to  digitize  the  posi- 
tion of  potentiometers.  The  conversion  process  is  based  on  the  time  con- 
stant of  a capacitor  tied  from  the  POT  pin  to  ground,  charged  by  a 
potentiometer  tied  from  the  POT  pin  to  +5  volts.  The  component  values 
are  determined  by: 


RC  = 4.7E-4 

Where  R is  the  maximum  resistance  of  the  pot  and  C is  the  capacitor. 

The  larger  the  capacitor,  the  smaller  the  POT  value  jitter.  The  recom- 
mended values  for  R and  C are  470  kfl  and  1000  pF.  Note  that  a 
separate  pot  and  cap  are  required  for  each  POT  pin. 

Vcc  (Pin  25) 

As  with  the  GND  line,  a separate  +5  VDC  line  should  be  run  between 
SID  Vcc  and  the  power  supply  in  order  to  minimize  noise.  A bypass 
capacitor  should  be  located  close  to  the  pin. 

EXT  IN  (Pin  26) 

This  analog  input  allows  external  audio  signals  to  be  mixed  with  the 
audio  output  of  SID  or  processed  through  the  Filter.  Typical  sources  in- 
clude voice,  guitar,  and  organ.  The  input  impedance  of  this  pin  is  on  the 
order  of  100  kfl.  Any  signal  applied  directly  to  the  pin  should  ride  at  a 
DC  level  of  6 volts  and  should  not  exceed  3 volts  p-p.  In  order  to  pre- 


472  APPENDIX  O 


vent  any  interference  caused  by  DC  level  differences,  external  signals 
should  be  AC-coupled  to  EXT  IN  by  an  electrolytic  capacitor  in  the  1-10 
fx F range.  As  the  direct  audio  path  (FILTEX  = 0)  has  unity  gain,  EXT  IN 
can  be  used  to  mix  outputs  of  many  SID  chips  by  daisy-chaining.  The 
number  of  chips  that  can  be  chained  in  this  manner  is  determined  by  the 
amount  of  noise  and  distortion  allowable  at  the  final  output.  Note  that 
the  output  Volume  control  will  affect  not  only  the  three  SID  voices,  but 
also  any  external  inputs. 

AUDIO  OUT  (Pin  27) 

This  open-source  buffer  is  the  final  audio  output  of  SID,  comprised  of 
the  three  SID  voices,  the  Filter  and  any  external  input.  The  output  level  is 
set  by  the  output  Volume  control  and  reaches  a maximum  of  2 volts  p-p 
at  a DC  level  of  6 volts.  A source  resistor  from  AUDIO  OUT  to  ground  is 
required  for  proper  operation.  The  recommended  resistance  is  1 kfl  for 
a standard  output  impedance. 

As  the  output  of  SID  rides  at  a 6-volt  DC  level,  it  should  be  AC- 
coupled  to  any  audio  amplifier  with  an  electrolytic  capacitor  in  the  1 — 10 
ix F range. 

V DD  (Pin  28) 

As  with  Vqc,  a separate  +12  VDC  line  should  be  run  to  SID  VDD  and  a 
bypass  capacitor  should  be  used. 

6581  SID  CHARACTERISTICS 

ABSOLUTE  MAXIMUM  RATINGS 


RATING 

SYMBOL 

VALUE 

UNITS 

Supply  Voltage 

Vdd 

-0.3  to  +17 

VDC 

Supply  Voltage 

Vcc 

-0.3  to  +7 

VDC 

Input  Voltage  (analog) 

Vjna 

-0.3  to  +17 

VDC 

Input  Voltage  (digital) 

Vind 

-0.3  to  +7 

VDC 

Operating  Temperature 

Ta 

0 to  +70 

°C 

Storage  Temperature 

Tstg 

-55  to  +150 

°c 

APPENDIX  O 473 


CO 

VDC 

VDC 

h- 

z 

D 

< < 

=1  :l 

VDC 

VDC 

< 

hs 

X 

< 

8 « 

o 

0 

1 

1 

% 

> O 

CM  •“ 

o 

o 

> 

o. 

>- 

1 1 

1 

1 

h- 

1 1 

1 1 

1 

Z 

CO 

| | 

Tf 

Q 

o 

— 

CM  o 

z 

o 

1 

1 1 

CM 

O 

CM 

_ i 

O 

co 

>- 

X -i 

> > 

c 55 

_r  j- 

X 

O 

> 

—i 

o 

> 

X 

_o 

CO 

U 

Q 

CO 

U _ 

CO  X 

(J  io  o 

u 

c 

X 

0 

Q) 

^ fsT 

„ 1 E 

Q 

E 

E -> 

c 

$ ? 11 
-C  II  o 

> 

H t 

o 

N < 
o c 

1 u 

on.  o 
. Q 

or  c o 
- > > 

CM 

l 

V?  O 

> o 

>°~ 

° > 
co  ^ 

CM 

CM 

1 

CM 

...  CO 

...  Tt 

. < 

t3~s 

o 

i H 

co  | 

CO  | 1 

II 

1 o 

1 o 

£ o 

LJJ  o 9 

c 

o o 

o o 

o s 

£ < 

ss  < s 

> 

£ ~ 

Q — 

£ >° 

+- 

4- 

c 

c 

0 

0 

0 

0 

CD 

O 

4- 

u 

h— 

CO 

m 

II 

D _ 

U Hz 

V. 

i_ 

D 

u 

CD 

0 

4— 

o 

c 

0 

V_ 

i_ 

D 

O' 

o — 

0 O 

0 

> 

u 

LU 

h- 

u 

> $ 
-C  . 

CD  ^ 

_g  a> 

CD 

O 

_c 

CD 

_c 

CD 

< 

on 

< 

X 

CD  £ 

if  3 

O o 

ii  <« 

O 

0 
i 

i 

4— 

o 
1 

X 

D D 

4-  0 

D 0 

3 

D 

a 

D 

a 

D 

a 

u 

o.  a 

0- 

a 

D 

D 

D 

c c 

. 

_E  f 

c 

o 

o 

O 

474  APPENDIX  O 


6581  (SID)  TIMING 

1 MHz  Timing  Set:  The  1 MHz  timing  set  contains  the  spec,  timing  for 
the  6581. 

READ/WRITE  CYCLE 


SYMBOL 

NAME 

DURATION 

Cycle  Time 

1000ns 

Tchw 

Clock  High  Pulse  Width 

450  ns 

Twcs 

Chip  Select  Setup 

375  ns 

Tcsh 

Chip  Select  Hold 

15  ns 

Tads 

Address  Setup 

45  ns 

Tadh 

Address  Hold 

10  ns 

Trws 

Read/Write  Setup 

45  ns 

Trwh 

Read/Write  Hold 

15  ns 

Tds 

Data  Setup  Write 

125  ns 

Tdh 

Data  Hold  Read 

25  ns 

Tco 

Chip  Select  To  Data  And  Read  Data 

350  ns 

Tdr 

Data  Hold  Time 

50  ns 

tacc 

Access  Time 

350  ns 

476  APPENDIX  O 


APPENDIX  O 477 


EQUAL-TEMPERED  MUSICAL  SCALE  VALUES 


The  table  in  Appendix  E lists  the  numerical  values  which  must  be 
stored  in  the  SID  Oscillator  frequency  control  registers  to  produce  the 
notes  of  the  equal-tempered  musical  scale.  The  equal-tempered  scale 
consists  of  an  octave  containing  12  semitones  (notes):  C/D,E/F/G/A/B 
and  C#,D#,F#,G#,A#.  The  frequency  of  each  semitone  is  exactly  the 
12th  root  of  2 (V  2)  times  the  frequency  of  the  previous  semitone.  The 
table  is  based  on  a <p2  clock  of  1 .02  MHz.  Refer  to  the  equation  given  in 
the  Register  Description  for  use  of  other  master  clock  frequencies.  The 
scale  selected  is  concert  pitch,  in  which  A-4  = 440  Hz.  Transpositions  of 
this  scale  and  scales  other  than  the  equal-tempered  scale  are  also  pos- 
sible. 

Although  the  table  in  Appendix  E provides  a simple  and  quick  method 
for  generating  the  equal-tempered  scale,  it  is  very  memory  inefficient  as 
it  requires  192  bytes  for  the  table  alone.  Memory  efficiency  can  be  im- 
proved by  determining  the  note  value  algorithmically.  Using  the  fact  that 
each  note  in  an  octave  is  exactly  half  the  frequency  of  that  note  in  the 
next  octave,  the  note  look-up  table  can  be  reduced  from  96  entries  to  12 
entries,  as  there  are  12  notes  per  octave.  If  the  12  entries  (24  bytes) 
consist  of  the  16-bit  values  for  the  eighth  octave  (C-7  through  B-7),  then 
notes  in  lower  octaves  can  be  derived  by  choosing  the  appropriate  note 
in  the  eighth  octave  and  dividing  the  16-bit  value  by  two  for  each  octave 
of  difference.  As  division  by  two  is  nothing  more  than  a right-shift  of  the 
value,  the  calculation  can  easily  be  accomplished  by  a simple  software 
routine.  Although  note  B-7  is  beyond  the  range  of  the  oscillators,  this 
value  should  still  be  included  in  the  table  for  calculation  purposes  (the 
MSB  of  B-7  would  require  a special  software  case,  such  as  generating 
this  bit  in  the  CARRY  before  shifting).  Each  note  must  be  specified  in  a 
form  which  indicates  which  of  the  12  semitones  is  desired,  and  which  of 
the  eight  octaves  the  semitone  is  in.  Since  four  bits  are  necessary  to 
select  1 of  12  semitones  and  three  bits  are  necessary  to  select  1 of  8 
octaves,  the  information  can  fit  in  one  byte,  with  the  lower  nybble  select- 
ing the  semitone  (by  addressing  the  look-up  table)  and  the  upper  nybble 
being  used  by  the  division  routine  to  determine  how  many  times  the 
table  value  must  be  right-shifted. 


478  APPENDIX  O 


SID  ENVELOPE  GENERATORS 


The  four-part  ADSR  (ATTACK,  DECAY,  SUSTAIN,  RELEASE)  envelope 
generator  has  been  proven  in  electronic  music  to  provide  the  optimum 
trade-off  between  flexibility  and  ease  of  amplitude  control.  Appropriate 
selection  of  envelope  parameters  allows  the  simulation  of  a wide  range 
of  percussion  and  sustained  instruments.  The  violin  is  a good  example  of 
a sustained  instrument.  The  violinist  controls  the  volume  by  bowing  the 
instrument.  Typically,  the  volume  builds  slowly,  reaches  a peak,  then 
drops  to  an  intermediate  level.  The  violinist  can  maintain  this  level  for  as 
long  as  desired,  then  the  volume  is  allowed  to  slowly  die  away.  A 
"snapshot"  of  this  envelope  is  shown  below: 


This  volume  envelope  can  be  easily  reproduced  by  the  ADSR  as  shown 
below,  with  typical  envelope  rates: 


ATTACK:  10  ($A)  500  ms 

DECAY:  8 300  ms 

SUSTAIN:  10  ($A) 

RELEASE:  9 750  ms 


Note  that  the  tone  can  be  held  at  the  intermediate  SUSTAIN  level  for 
as  long  as  desired.  The  tone  will  not  begin  to  die  away  until  GATE  is 
cleared.  With  minor  alterations,  this  basic  envelope  can  be  used  for 
brass  and  woodwinds  as  well  as  strings. 

An  entirely  different  form  of  envelope  is  produced  by  percussion  in- 
struments such  as  drums,  cymbals  and  gongs,  as  well  as  certain 
keyboards  such  as  pianos  and  harpsichords.  The  percussion  envelope  is 
characterized  by  a nearly  instantaneous  attack,  immediately  followed 
by  a decay  to  zero  volume.  Percussion  instruments  cannot  be  sustained 


APPENDIX  O 479 


i 


at  a constant  amplitude.  For  example,  the  instant  a drum  is  struck,  the 
sound  reaches  full  volume  and  decays  rapidly  regardless  of  how  it  was 
struck.  A typical  cymbal  envelope  is  shown  below: 


ATTACK:  0 2ms 

DECAY:  9 750ms 

SUSTAIN:  0 

RELEASE:  9 750ms 


Note  that  the  tone  immediately  begins  to  decay  to  zero  amplitude 
after  the  peak  is  reached,  regardless  of  when  GATE  is  cleared.  The 
amplitude  envelope  of  pianos  and  harpsichords  is  somewhat  more 
complicated,  but  can  be  generated  quite  easily  with  the  ADSR.  These 
instruments  reach  full  volume  when  a key  is  first  struck.  The  amplitude 
immediately  begins  to  die  away  slowly  as  long  as  the  key  remains  de- 
pressed. If  the  key  is  released  before  the  sound  has  fully  died  away,  the 
amplitude  will  immediately  drop  to  zero.  This  envelope  is  shown  below: 


ATTACK:  0 
DECAY:  9 

SUSTAIN:  0 
RELEASE:  0 


2 ms 
750  ms 


6 ms 


GATE 


Note  that  the  tone  decays  slowly  until  GATE  is  cleared,  at  which  point 
the  amplitude  drops  rapidly  to  zero. 

The  most  simple  envelope  is  that  of  the  organ,  When  a key  is  pressed, 
the  tone  immediately  reaches  full  volume  and  remains  there.  When  the 
key  is  released,  the  tone  drops  immediately  to  zero  volume.  This 
envelope  is  shown  below: 


ATTACK:  0 

2 ms 

DECAY:  0 

6 ms 

SUSTAIN:  15  ($F) 

RELEASE:  0 

6 ms 

The  real  power  of  SID  lies  in  the  ability  to  create  original  sounds 
rather  than  simulations  of  acoustic  instruments.  The  ADSR  is  capable  of 
creating  envelopes  which  do  not  correspond  to  any  "real"  instruments.  A 
good  example  would  be  the  "backwards"  envelope.  This  envelope  is 
characterized  by  a slow  attack  and  rapid  decay  which  sounds  very 


480  APPENDIX  O 


much  like  an  instrument  that  has  been  recorded  on  tape  then  played 
backwards.  This  envelope  is  shown  below: 


ATTACK:  10  ($A)  500  ms 

DECAY:  0 6 ms 

SUSTAIN:  15  ($F) 

RELEASE:  3 72  ms 


Many  unique  sounds  can  be  created  by  applying  the  amplitude 
envelope  of  one  instrument  to  the  harmonic  structure  of  another.  This 
produces  sounds  similar  to  familiar  acoustic  instruments,  yet  notably  dif- 
ferent. In  general,  sound  is  quite  subjective  and  experimentation  with 
various  envelope  rates  and  harmonic  contents  will  be  necessary  in  order 
to  achieve  the  desired  sound. 


+ 12  V + 5 V 


APPENDIX  O 481 


APPENDIX  P 


GLOSSARY 

ADSR 

attack 

binary 

Boolean  operators 
byte 

CHROMA  noise 

CIA 

DDR 

decay 

decimal 

e 

envelope 

FIFO 

hexadecimal 

integer 

jiffy  clock 

NMI 

octal 

operand 

OS 

pixel 

queue 

register 

release 

ROM 

SID 

signed  numbers 

subscript 

sustain 

syntax 

truncated 

VIC-II 

video  screen 


Attack/Decay/Sustain/Release  envelope. 

Rate  at  which  musical  note  reaches  peak 
volume. 

Base-2  number  system. 

Logical  operators. 

Memory  location. 

Color  distortion. 

Complex  Interface  Adapter. 

Data  Direction  Register. 

Rate  at  which  musical  note  falls  from  peak 
volume  to  sustain  volume. 

Base-10  number  system. 

Mathematical  constant  (approx.  2.71828183). 
Shape  of  the  volume  of  a note  over  time. 
First-In/First-Out. 

Base-16  number  system. 

Whole  number  (without  decimal  point). 
Hardware  interval  timer. 

Non-Maskable  Interrupt. 

Base-8  number  system. 

Parameter. 

Operating  System. 

Dot  of  resolution  on  the  screen. 

Single-file  line. 

Special  memory  storage  location. 

Rate  at  which  a musical  note  falls  from 
sustain  volume  to  no  volume. 

Read-Only  Memory. 

Sound  Interface  Device. 

Plus  or  minus  numbers. 

Index  variable. 

Volume  level  for  sustain  of  musical  note. 
Programming  sentence  structure. 

Cut  off,  eliminated  (not  rounded). 

Video  Interface  Chip. 

Television  set. 


482  APPENDIX  P 


INDEX 


Abbreviations,  BASIC  Commands,  State- 
ments, and  Functions,  x,  29,  31-34, 
374-375 

ABS  function,  31,  35,  374 

Accessories,  335-371 

Accumulator,  213 

ACPTR,  272-274 

ADC,  232,  235,  254 

Addition,  3,  9-11,  16 

Addressing,  211,  215-217,  411-413 

A/D/S/R,  183-185,  189,  196-199 

AND,  232,  235,  254 

AND  operator,  13-16,  31,  35-36,  374 

Animation,  xiii,  153,  166 

Applications,  xiii-xvi 

Arithmetic  expressions,  10-12 

Arithmetic  operators,  10-12,  16 

Arrays,  10-12,  44-45 

ASC  function,  31,  37,  374 

ASCII  character  codes,  31,  38,  340,  374 

ASL,  232,  236,  254 

Assembler,  215,  218,  227,  310 

ArcTaNgent  function,  31,  38,  374 

Attack,  (see  A/D/S/R) 

Bank  selection,  101-102,  133 
BASIC  abbreviations,  29,  31-34,  374-375 
BASIC  commands,  31-34,  41,  58-60,  62, 
81-82,  91 

BASIC  miscellaneous  functions,  31-34, 
43-44,  49,  56-57,  61,  69,  70,  80,  83-85, 
89 

BASIC  numeric  functions,  31-35,  37-38,  42, 
46-47,  49,  83-84,  88-89 
BASIC  operators,  3,  9-15,  31-36,  63-64, 
68,  92 

BASIC  statements,  18-26,  31-34,  39-55,  57, 
62-67,  69-79,  86-87,  92 
BASIC  string  functions,  31-34,  38,  56,  61, 
79,  87,  89 

BASIC  variables,  7-26 
BCC,  232,  236,  254 
BCS,  232,  236,  254 
BEQ,  226-227,  232,  237,  254 
Bibliography,  388-390 
Binary,  69,  92,  108,  112,  216-217 
Bit,  99-149,  290,  298,  300-301,  305,  343- 
357,  359 

BIT,  232,  237,  254 

Bit  map  mode,  121-130 

Bit  map  mode,  multicolor,  127-130 

Bit  mapping,  121-130 

BMI,  232,  237,  254 

BNE,  226-227,  232,  238,  254 

Boolean  arithmetic,  14 

BPL,  232,  238,  254 

Branches  and  testing,  226-227 

BRK,  232,  238,  254 

Buffer,  keyboard,  93 


Business  aids,  xiii-xvi 
BVC,  232,  239,  254 
BVS,  232,  239,  254 

Byte,  9,  104,  108,  117-119,  124-127,  196, 
213,  218-220,  222-227,  260-263,  274, 
278-279,  286,  292-293,  299,  307,  349, 
357-359 

Cassette  port,  337,  340-342 
Cassette,  tape  recorder,  xiii,  39-41,  65-67, 
81-82,  91,  187,  192,  283,  293-294,  297, 
320-321,  337-338,  340-342 
Character  PEEKs  and  POKEs,  104,  106, 
109-111,  115,  118,  120-122,  127-130, 
134-137,  150,  154-155,  159-161,  165- 
166 

CHAREN,  260-261 
CHKIN,  272-273,  275 
CHKOUT,  272-273,  276 
CHRGET,  272-273,  307-308 
CHRIN,  272-273,  277-278 
CHROUT,  272-273,  278-279 
CHR$  function,  24,  31,  37-38,  45,  50,  55, 
75-76,  93-94,  97,  120,  156,  336-342, 
374,  379-381 
CINT,  272-273,  280 
CIOUT,  272-273,  279-280 
CLALL,  272-273,  281 

CLC,  232,  239,  254 

CLD,  232,  240,  254 
CLI,  232,  240,  254 

Clock,  80,  89,  314,  329-322,  366,  406-408, 
421-427,  431,  450 
Clock  timing  diagram,  406-408 
CLOSE,  272-273,  281-282 
CLOSE  statement,  31,  39-41,  348,  354,  374 
CLR  statement,  31,  39-40,  81,  109,  374 
CLRCHN,  272-273,  282 
CLR/HOME  key,  220 
CLV,  232,  240,  254 
CMD  statement,  31,  40-41,  374 
CMP,  232,  241,  254 
Collision  detect,  144-145,  180 
Color  adjustment,  113 
Color  combinations  chart,  152 
Color  memory,  103 

Color  register,  117,  120,  128,  135-136,  179 
Color  screen,  background,  border,  115- 
119,  128,  135-137,  176,  179-180 
Commands,  BASIC,  31-92 
Commodore  magazine,  xvii-xviii,  390 
Commodore  64  memory  map,  310 
Complement,  twos,  63-64 
Constants,  floating-point,  integer,  string, 
5-7,  46,  77-78 

CONTinue  command,  31,  41-42,  46,  81, 
86,  374 

ConTRoL  key,  58,  72,  93-97,  171 
COSine  function,  31-34,  42,  374 


INDEX  483 


CP/M,  x,  xiv,  368-371 

CPX,  227,  232,  241,  254 

CPY,  227,  232,  241,  254 

Crunching  BASIC  programs,  24-27,  156 
CuRSoR  keys,  93-97,  336 

DATASSETTE™  recorder,  (see  cassette, 
tape  recorder) 

DATA  statement,  26,  31,  42-43,  76-77, 
111-114,  164,  169,  174,  374 
DEC,  232,  242,  254 
Decay,  (see  A/D/S/R) 

DEFine  FuNction  statement,  31,  43-44,  374 
DELete  key,  71-72,  95-96 

DEX,  226,  232,  242,  254 

DEY,  226,  232,  242,  254 

DIMension  statement,  9,  31,  44-45,  374 
Direct  mode,  3 
Division,  3,  10-11 

Edit  mode,  93-97 
Editor,  screen,  93-97 
END  statement,  32,  46,  79,  93,  374 
Envelope  generator,  (see  A/D/S/R) 

EOR,  232,  243,  254 
Equal,  not-equal-to  signs,  3,  9-12 
Error  messages,  306,  400-401 
Expansion  port(s),  (also  user  port,  serial 
port,  RS-232  port),  335-371 
EXPonent  function,  32,  46,  374 
Exponentiation,  5-6,  10,  12,  16 

Files  (cassette),  40,  50,  55,  59-60,  65-66, 
75,  84-85,  91,  337-338,  340-342 
Files  (disk),  40,  50,  55,  59-60,  65-66,  75, 
84-85,  91,  337-338,  342 
Filtering,  183,  189,  199-202 
Fire  button,  joystick/paddle/lightpen,  328- 
329,  343-348 

FOR  statement,  20-21,  32,  39,  47-48, 
62-63,  77-78,  86,  110,  155-156,  165- 
166,  169-171,  198-199,  309,  374 
Football,  45 

FREe  function,  32,  49,  109,  374 
FuNction  function,  32,  47,  374 
Function  keys,  22-24 

Functions,  31-34,  35,  37-38,  42,  46-47,  49, 
56-57,  61,  69-70,  79-80,  83-85,  87-90, 
374-375 

Game  controls  and  ports,  343-348 
GET  statement,  22-24,  32,  37,  49-50,  93, 
374-375 

GETIN,  272-273,  283 

GET#  statement,  32,  37,  50,  55,  65,  341- 
342,  348,  374 

GOSUB  statement,  32,  39,  51-52,  77,  79, 
85,  374 

GOTO  (GO  TO)  statement,  32,  37,  48, 
52-53,  64,  77,  81,  86,  374 
Graphics  keys,  xiv-xv,  70-74,  95-96,  108- 
114 


Graphics  mode,  xiv-xv,  99-183 
Graphics  mode,  bit  mapped,  121-130 
Graphics  symbols,  (see  graphics  keys) 
Greater  than,  equal  to  or,  3,  12-13,  16 

Hexadecimal  notation,  101,  209,  215-218 
Hierarchy  of  operations,  16 

IEEE-488  interface,  (see  serial  port) 

IF  . . . THEN  statement,  32,  46-47,  49, 
52-53,  64,  70,  86,  172-173,  180,  374 
INC,  232,  243,  254 
Income/expense  program,  20-21 
Indexed  indirect,  224-225 
Indexing,  223-225 
Indirect  indexed,  223-224 
INPUT  statement,  18-22,  32,  45,  53-55,  93, 
374 

INPUT#  statement,  32,  55,  75,  86,  88,  90, 
374 

INSerT  key,  72,  95-96 
INTeger  function,  32,  56,  80,  374 
Integer,  arrays,  constants,  variables,  5, 
7-9 

INX,  226-227,  232,  243,  254 

INY,  226-227,  232,  244,  254 

IOBASE,  272-273,  284 

I/O  Guide,  335-375 

IOINIT,  272-273,  285 

I/O  Pinouts,  395-397 

I/O  Ports,  214,  260,  335-375 

I/O  Registers,  104-106,  212-214 

I/O  Statements,  39,  50,  54-55,  65-67,  75 

IRQ,  308 

Joysticks,  343-345 

JMP,  228-230,  232,  244,  254,  270,  308 

JSR,  228-230,  233,  244,  255,  268,  270 

KERNAL,  2,  94,  209,  228-230,  308,  268- 
306,  348-358 
Keyboard,  93-98 
Keywords,  BASIC,  29-92 

LDA,  218-220,  233,  245,  255 

LDX,  233,  245,  255 

LDY,  233,  246,  255 

LEFT$  function,  32,  56,  375 
LENgth  function,  32,  57,  375 
Less  than,  equal  to  or,  3,  12-13,  16 
LET  statement,  32,  57,  375 
LIST  command,  32,  58,  375 
LISTEN,  272-273,  285 
LOAD,  272-273,  286 
LOAD  command,  32,  59-60,  370,  375 
Loading  programs  from  tape,  disk,  59-60, 
337-338,  340-342 
LOGarithm  function,  32,  61,  375 
Lower  case  characters,  72-74,  105 
LPX  (LPY),  348 
LSR,  233,  246,  255 


484  INDEX 


Machine  language,  209-334,  411-413 
Mask,  92 

Mathematics  formulas,  394 
Mathematical  symbols,  3,  6-17,  394 
MEMBOT,  272-273,  287 
Memory  maps,  212,  262-267,  272-273, 
310-33.4 

Memory  map,  abbreviated,  212 
Memory  reallocation,  101-103 
MEMTOP,  272-273,  288 
MID$  function,  33,  61,  375 
Modem,  xiii-xviii,  339-340 
Modulation,  183,  207-208 
Multiplication,  3,  10-11 
Music,  183-208 

NEW  command,  18,  33,  62,  111,  117,  185, 
187,  375 

NEXT  command,  20-21,  33,  39,  47-48, 

62- 63,  77-78,  86,  110,  155-156,  165- 
166,  169-171,  198-199,  309,  375 

NOP,  233,  246,  255 

NOT  operator,  13-16,  33,  63-64,  375 

Note  types,  190 

Numeric  variables,  7-8,  26 

ON  (ON  . . . GOTO/GOSUB)  statement,  33, 
64,  375 

OPEN,  272-273,  289 

OPEN  statement,  33,  41,  65-67,  75-76,  85, 
94,  337-339,  349-352,  375 
Operating  system,  210-211 
Operators,  arithmetic,  3,  10-12,  16 
Operators,  logical,  13-16,  31-33,  35-37, 

63- 64,  68,  374-375 
Operators,  relational,  3,  12-13,  16 

OR  operator,  13-26,  33,  68,  101-102,  104, 
106,  115,  118,  120,  122,  126-127,  129, 
134,  136-137,  375 
ORA,  233,  247,  255 


Parentheses,  3,  8 

, 30, 

33, 

83-84 

, 88, 

375 

PEEK  function,  33 

1,  69, 

93, 

101- 

102, 

104, 

106, 

108-111, 

115, 

118, 

120- 

122, 

126- 

130, 

134-137, 

145, 

150, 

159- 

160, 

176- 

177, 

180,  185, 

211, 

361, 

375 

Peripherals,  (see  I/O  Guide) 

PHA,  233,  247,  255 
PHP,  233,  247,  255 

Pinouts,  (also  see  I/O  Pinouts),  363,  395- 
397 

PLA,  233,  248,  255 
PLOT,  273,  290 
PLP,  233,  248,  255 

POKE  statement,  25,  33,  69-70,  94,  101- 
102,  104,  106,  109-111,  115-116  118, 
120-123,  126-130,  134-137,  150,  153- 
161,  165-166,  168-170,  172-173,  177- 
178,  180,  184-186,  194,  198-199,  204- 
205,  211,  220,  309,  361,  375-376 
Ports,  I/O,  214,  335-375,  395-397 


POSition  function,  33,  70,  375 
Power/Play,  xvi,  390 

PRINT  statement,  13-15,  18-22,  25,  33-54, 
56-61,  63,  68-75,  79-80,  83-84,  87-89, 
94-96,  109,  168,  171,  210,  213,  220, 
375 

PRINT#  statement,  33,  40-41,  75-76,  85, 
94,  337,  340-341,  348,  353,  375 
Printer,  xv,  338-339 
Program  counter,  214 
Program  mode,  3 
Prompt,  45 

Quotation  marks,  xi,  3,  23/  72,  95,  337 
Quote  mode,  72-73,  95-96 

RAM,  49,  100-101,  104-105,  107-108, 
110-111,  117,  122,  260-262,  269,  340 
RAMTAS,  273,  291 
Random  numbers,  53,  80 
RaNDom  function,  33,  43,  53,  80,  375 
Raster  interrupt,  131,  150-152 
RDTIM,  273,  291 
READST,  273,  292 

READ  statement,  33,  42,  76-77,  111,  170, 
309,  375 

Release,  (see  A/D/S/R) 

Register  map,  CIA  chip,  428 
Register  map,  SID  chip,  461 
Register  map,  VIC  chip,  454-455 
REMark  statement,  25-26,  33,  37-38, 
41-42,  45-46,  50,  77-78,  93-95,  101, 
118,  198-199,  338,  340,  356,  375 
Reserved  words,  (see  Keywords,  BASIC) 
RESTOR,  273,  293 
RESTORE  key,  22,  92,  126,  353 
RESTORE  statement,  33,  78,  375 
RETURN  key,  3,  18,  22,  41,  50-51,  74, 
93-97,  154-155,  166,  217,  220,  336-337, 
370 

RETURN  statement,  33,  51-52,  79,  85,  175, 
375 

ReVerSe  ON,  OFF  keys,  97 
RIGHT$  function,  33,  79,  375 

ROL,  233,  248,  255 

ROM,  261,  268-269 

ROM,  character  generator,  103-111,  134 

ROR,  233,  249,  255 

RS-232C,  335,  348-359 

RTI,  233,  249,  255,  308 

RTS,  233,  249,  255 

RUN  command,  33,  40,  59,  81,  113,  154, 
375 

RUN/STOP  key,  22,  41-42,  52,  58,  86,  92, 
126,  220,  353 

SAVE,  273,  293-294 
SAVE  command,  34,  81-82,  375 
SBC,  233,  250,  255 
SCNKEY,  273,  295 
SCREEN,  273,  295-296 


INDEX  485 


Screen  editor,  2,  94-97,  211 
Screen  memory,  102-103 
Scrolling,  128-130,  166 

SEC,  233,  250,  255 
SECOND,  273,  296 

SED,  233,  250,  255 
SEI,  233,  251,  255 

Serial  port  (IEEE-488),  262,  331,  333,  362- 
366,  432-433 
SETLFS,  273,  297 
SETMSG,  273,  298 
SETNAM,  273,  298-299 
SETTIM,  273,  299-300 
SETTMO,  273,  300-301 
SGN  function,  34,  83,  109,  375 
SHIFT  key,  4,  30,  72,  74,  94,  96-97,  168, 
220 

SID  chip  programming,  xiv,  183-208 

SID  chip  specifications,  457-481 

SID  chip  memory  map,  223-328 

SINe  function,  34,  83,  375 

Sound  waves,  186-187,  192-196 

SPaCe  function,  27,  34,  83-84,  336,  375 

Sprites,  x,  xiv,  99-100,  131-149,  153-182 

Sprite  display  priorities,  144,  161,  179 

Sprite  positioning,  137-143,  157-161,  177 

SQuare  Root  function,  34,  84,  375 

STA,  221,  233,  251,  255 

Stack  pointer,  214,  222 

STATUS  function,  34,  84-85,  354,  375 

Status  register,  214,  354 

STEP  keyword,  (see  FOR  . . . TO),  34,  86 

STOP,  273,  301 

STOP  command,  34,  41,  86,  375 
STOP  key,  (see  RUN/STOP  key) 

String  arrays,  constants,  variables,  5,  7-9 
String  expressions,  10,  17 
String  operators,  10,  17 
STR$  function,  34,  87,  375 

STX,  233,  251,  255 

STY,  233,  252,  255 
Subroutines,  222,  228-229,  270,  307 


Subtraction,  3,  10-11,  16 
Sustain,  (see  A/D/S/R) 

SYS  statement,  34,  87,  121,  307,  375 

TAB  function,  27,  34,  45,  88,  336,  375 
TANgent  function,  34,  88,  375 
TALK,  273,  301-302 

TAX,  233,  252,  255 

TAY,  233,  252,  255 

THEN  keyword,  (see  IF  . . . THEN),  34 

TIME  function,  34,  89,  375 

TIMES  function,  34,  89,  375 

TKSA,  273,  302-303 

TO  keyword,  (see  FOR  . . . TO),  34 

TSX,  233,  253,  255 

TXA,  229,  233,  253,  255 

TXS,  233,  253,  255 

TYA,  229,  233,  253,  255 

UDTIM,  273,  303 

UNLSN,  273,  303-304 

UNTLK,  273,  304 

User  port,  355,  359-362 

USR  function,  34,  90,  307,  375 

VALue  function,  34,  90,  375 
VECTOR,  273,  304-306 
VERIFY  command,  34,  91,  375 
Vibrato,  203 
Voices,  187-191 
Volume  control,  SID,  186 

WAIT  statement,  13-14,  34,  92,  375 

XOR,  (see  WAIT  statement),  13-14 
X index  register,  213,  223-224 

Y index  register,  214,  223-224 

Z-80,  (see  CP/M) 

Zero  page,  221-222,  358-359 


486 


INDEX 


COMMODORE  64  QUICK  REFERENCE  CARD 


SIM  PIE  VARIABLES 

Type  Name  Range 
Real  XY  ± 1 .70141 183E+38 

±2.93873588E— 39 
Integer  XY%  ±32767 

String  XY$  0 to  255  characters 

X is  a letter  (A-Z),  Y is  a letter  or  number  (0-9).  Variable  names 
can  be  more  than  2 characters,  but  only  the  first  two  are  recog- 
nized. 

ARRAY  VARIABLES 

Type  Name 

Single  Dimension  XY(5) 

Two-Dimension  XY(5,5) 

Three-Dimension  XY(5,5,5) 


Arrays  of  up  to  eleven  elements  (subscripts  0-10)  can  be  used 
where  needed.  Arrays  with  more  than  eleven  elements  need  to 
be  DIMensioned. 

ALGEBRAIC  OPERATORS 

= Assigns  value  to  variable 

— Negation 

~ * Exponentiation 
* Multiplication 
/ Division 
+ Addition 

— Subtraction 

RELATIONAL  AND  LOGICAL  OPERATORS 

= Equal 
<>  Not  Equal  To 
< Less  Than 
> Greater  Than 
<=  Less  Than  or  Equal  To 
>=  Greater  Than  or  Equal  To 
NOT  Logical  "Not" 

AND  Logical  "And" 

OR  Logical  "Or" 

Expression,  equals  1 if  true,  0 if  false. 


SYSTEM  COMMANDS 

LOAD  "NAME" 

SAVE  "NAME" 

LOAD  "NAME", 8 
SAVE  "NAME", 8 
VERIFY  "NAME" 


RUN 
RUN  > 


Loads  a program  from  tape 
Saves  a program  on  tape 
Loads  a program  from  disk 
Saves  a program  to  disk 
Verifies  that  program  was  SAVEd 
without  errors 
Executes  a program 
Executes  program  starting  at  line 


STOP 

END 

CONT 

PEEK(X) 

POKE  X,Y 

SYS  xxxxx 

WAIT  X,Y,Z 


USR(X) 


Halts  execution 
Ends  execution 

Continues  program  execution  from 
line  where  program  was  halted 
Returns  contents  of  memory 
location  X 

Changes  contents  of  location  X 
to  value  Y 

Jumps  to  execute  a machine  language 
program,  starting  at  xxxxx 
Program  waits  until  contents  of 
location  X,  when  EORed  with  Z and 
ANDed  with  Y,  is  nonzero. 

Passes  value  of  X to  a machine 
language  subroutine 


EDITING  AND  FORMATTING  COMMANDS 

LIST  Lists  entire  program 

LIST  A-B  Lists  from  line  A to  line  B 

REM  Message  Comment  message  can  be  listed  but 

is  ignored  during  program  execution 
TAB(X)  Used  in  PRINT  statements.  Spaces  X 

positions  on  screen 


SPC(X) 

POS(X) 

CLR/HOME 

SHIFT  CLR/HOME 

SHIFT  INST/DEL 

INST/DEL 

CTRL 


CRSR  Keys 
Commodore  Key 


PRINTS  X blanks  on  line 
Returns  current  cursor  position 
Positions  cursor  to  left  corner  of 
screen 

Clears  screen  and  places  cursor  in 
"Home"  position 
Inserts  space  at  current  cursor 
position 

Deletes  character  at  current  cursor 
position 

When  used  with  numeric  color  key, 
selects  text  color.  May  be  used  in 
PRINT  statement. 

Moves  cursor  up,  down,  left,  right 
on  screen 

When  used  with  SHIFT  selects 
between  upper/lower  case  and 
graphic  display  mode. 

When  used  with  numeric  color  key, 
selects  optional  text  color 


ARRAYS  AND  STRINGS 

DIM  A(X,Y,Z)  Sets  maximum  subscripts  for  A; 

reserves  space  for  (X+1)*(Y-M)*(Z+1) 
elements  starting  at  A(0,0,0) 

LEN  (X$)  Returns  number  of  characters  in  X$ 

STR$(X)  Returns  numeric  value  of  X, 

converted  to  a string 

VAL(X$)  Returns  numeric  value  of  AS,  up  to 

first  nonnumeric  character 

CHR$(X)  Returns  ASCII  character  whose  code 

is  X 

ASC(X$)  Returns  ASCII  code  for  first 

character  of  X$ 

LEFT$(A$,X)  Returns  leftmost  X characters  of  AS 

RIGHT$(AS,X)  Returns  rightmost  X characters 

of  AS 

MID$(A$,X,Y)  Returns  Y characters  of  AS 

starting  at  character  X 


INPUT/OUTPUT  COMMANDS 

INPUT  AS  OR  A PRINTs  '?'  on  screen  and  waits  for 
user  to  enter  a string  or  value 
PRINTs  message  and  waits  for  user 
to  enter  value.  Can  also  INPUT  AS 
Waits  for  user  to  type  one- 
character  value;  no  RETURN  needed 
Initializes  a set  of  values  that 
can  be  used  by  READ  statement 
Assigns  next  DATA  value  to  AS  or  A 
Resets  data  pointer  to  start 
READing  the  DATA  list  again 
PRINTs  string  'A=  ' and  value  of  A 
V suppresses  spaces  - tabs  data 
to  next  field. 


INPUT  "ABC";A 


GET  AS  or  A 


DATA  A,"B",C 


READ  AS  or  A 
RESTORE 


PRINT  "A=  ";A 


PROGRAM  FLOW 

GOTO  X 
IF  A=3  THEN  10 


FOR  A=  1 TO  10 
STEP  2 : NEXT 


NEXT  A 
GOSUB  2000 

RETURN 


Branches  to  line  X 

IF  assertion  is  true  THEN  execute 

following  part  of  statement.  IF 

false,  execute  next  line  number 

Executes  all  statements  between  FOR 

and  corresponding  NEXT,  with  A 

going  from  1 to  10  by  2.  Step  size 

is  1 unless  specified 

Defines  end  of  loop.  A is  optional 

Branches  to  subroutine  storting  at 

line  2000 

Marks  end  of  subroutine.  Returns  to 
statement  following  most  recent 


GOSUB 

ON  X GOTO  A,B  Branches  to  Xth  line  number  on 
list.  If  X = 1 branches  to  A,  etc. 
ON  X GOSUB  A,B  Branches  to  subroutine  at  Xth  line 
number  in  list 


n 


COMMODORE  64  QUICK  REFERENCE  CARD 


SIMPLE  VARIABLES 

Type  Name  Range 
Real  XY  ± 1 .70141 183E+38 

±2.93873588E— 39 
Integer  XY%  ±32767 

String  XY$  0 to  255  characters 

X is  a letter  (A-Z),  Y is  a letter  or  number  (0-9).  Variable  names 
can  be  more  than  2 characters,  but  only  the  first  two  are  recog- 
nized. 

ARRAY  VARIABLES 

Type  Name 

Single  Dimension  XY(5) 

Two-Dimension  XY(5,5) 

Three-Dimension  XY(5,5,5) 


Arrays  of  up  to  eleven  elements  (subscripts  0-10)  can  be  used 
where  needed.  Arrays  with  more  than  eleven  elements  need  to 
be  DIMensioned. 

ALGEBRAIC  OPERATORS 

= Assigns  value  to  variable 

— Negation 

— * Exponentiation 
* Multiplication 
/ Division 
+ Addition 

— Subtraction 

RELATIONAL  AND  LOGICAL  OPERATORS 

= Equal 
<>  Not  Equal  To 
< Less  Than 
> Greater  Than 
<=  Less  Than  or  Equal  To 
>=  Greater  Than  or  Equal  To 
NOT  Logical  "Not" 

AND  Logical  "And" 

OR  Logical  "Or" 

Expression. equals  1 if  true,  0 if  false. 


SYSTEM  COMMANDS 


LOAD  "NAME" 
SAVE  "NAME" 
LOAD  "NAME", 8 
SAVE  "NAME", 8 
VERIFY  "NAME" 

RUN 

RUN  xxx 


Loads  a program  from  tape 
Saves  a program  on  tape 
Loads  a program  from  disk 
Saves  a program  to  disk 
Verifies  that  program  was  SAVEd 
without  errors 
Executes  a program 
Executes  program  starting  at  line 


STOP 

END 

CONT 

PEEK(X) 

POKE  X,Y 

SYS  xxxxx 

WAIT  X,Y,Z 


USR(X) 


Halts  execution 
Ends  execution 

Continues  program  execution  from 
line  where  program  was  halted 
Returns  contents  of  memory 
location  X 

Changes  contents  of  location  X 
to  value  Y 

Jumps  to  execute  a machine  language 
program,  starting  at  xxxxx 
Program  waits  until  contents  of 
location  X,  when  EORed  with  Z and 
ANDed  with  Y,  is  nonzero. 

Passes  value  of  X to  a machine 
language  subroutine 


EDITING  AND  FORMATTING  COMMANDS 

LIST  Lists  entire  program 

LIST  A-B  Lists  from  line  A to  line  B 

REM  Message  Comment  message  can  be  listed  but 

is  ignored  during  program  execution 
TAB(X)  Used  in  PRINT  statements.  Spaces  X 

positions  on  screen 


PRINTS  X blanks  on  line 
Returns  current  cursor  position 
Positions  cursor  to  left  corner  of 
screen 

Clears  screen  and  places  cursor  in 
"Home"  position 
Inserts  space  at  current  cursor 
position 

Deletes  character  at  current  cursor 
position 

When  used  with  numeric  color  key, 
selects  text  color.  May  be  used  in 
PRINT  statement. 

Moves  cursor  up,  down,  left,  right 
on  screen 

When  used  with  SHIFT  selects 
between  upper/lower  case  and 
graphic  display  mode. 

When  used  with  numeric  color  key, 
selects  optional  text  color 


ARRAYS  AND  STRINGS 

DIM  A(X,Y,Z) 

Sets  maximum  subscripts  for  A; 
reserves  space  for  (X+1)*(Y+1)*(Z+1) 
elements  starting  at  A(0,0,0) 

LEN  (X$) 

Returns  number  of  characters  in  XS 

STR$(X) 

Returns  numeric  value  of  X, 
converted  to  a string 

VAL(X$) 

Returns  numeric  value  of  AS,  up  to 
first  nonnumeric  character 

CHR$(X) 

Returns  ASCII  character  whose  code 

is  X 

ASC(X$) 

Returns  ASCII  code  for  first 
character  of  XS 

LEFT$(A$,X) 

Returns  lefrmost  X characters  of  AS 

RIGHT$(A$,X) 

Returns  rightmost  X characters 
of  AS 

MID$(A$,X,Y) 

Returns  Y characters  of  AS 
starting  ot  character  X 

INPUT/OUTPUT  COMMANDS 

INPUT  A$  OR  A 

PRINTS  '?'  on  screen  and  waits  for 
user  to  enter  a string  or  value 

INPUT  "ABC";A 

PRINTs  message  and  waits  for  user 
to  enter  value.  Can  also  INPUT  AS 

GET  AS  or  A 

Waits  for  user  to  type  one- 
character  value;  no  RETURN  needed 

DATA  A ,"B",C 

Initializes  a set  of  values  that 
can  be  used  by  READ  statement 

READ  AS  or  A 

Assigns  next  DATA  value  to  AS  or  A 

RESTORE 

Resets  data  pointer  to  start 

READing  the  DATA  list  again 

PRINT  "A=  ";A 

PRINTs  string  'A=  ' and  value  of  A 
suppresses  spaces  - tabs  data 

to  next  field. 

PROGRAM  FLOW 

GOTO  X 

Branches  to  line  X 

IF  A=3  THEN  10 

IF  assertion  is  true  THEN  execute 
following  part  of  statement.  IF 
false,  execute  next  line  number 

FOR  A=  1 TO  10 

Executes  all  statements  between  FOR 

STEP  2 : NEXT 

and  corresponding  NEXT,  with  A 
going  from  1 to  10  by  2.  Step  size 
is  1 unless  specified 

NEXT  A 

Defines  end  of  loop.  A is  optional 

GOSUB  2000 

Branches  to  subroutine  starting  at 
line  2000 

RETURN 

Marks  end  of  subroutine.  Returns  to 
statement  following  most  recent 

GOSUB 

ON  X GOTO  A,B 

Branches  to  Xth  line  number  on 
list.  If  X = 1 branches  to  A,  etc. 

ON  X GOSUB  A,B  Branches  to  subroutine  at  Xth  line 
number  in  list 


SPC(X) 

POS(X) 

CLR/HOME 

SHIFT  CLR/HOME 

SHIFT  INST/DEL 

INST/DEL 

CTRL 

CRSR  Keys 
Commodore  Key 


□ □ □ 
> 


q ' 

^ fD 
~ to  »-<■ 

s S ^ 

£D 

co  3 
C 0) 

cr  — 

co  -, 

Q CTQ 


■o'  57 


Q_ 
Q- 

3 

V) 

co 

n 

3- 
&) 
3 
CTQ 
. fD 
SD  ' 
CT  m 
ft)  3. 


3 

fD 

£ 

O) 

Q_ 

Q- 


Ui 

cr 

o 

< 

ro 

fD 

3 

Q_ 

o 


n 

o 

3 

“O 

c 

fD 
— « 

3 

o 

Q. 

fD 


n 


> 

Q_ 

Q. 

3 

co 


z 

O) 

3 

fD 


Lf) 

CD 

fD 


N 

"O 


O 

3 

fD 


o 

c 

H 

> 

Z 

□ 

> 


o 

□ 

$ 


HO 

1 1 
ff  2 

s.0 

o O 

< o 

•S"  a 


S 

< 

O m O 

3 </)  3 

t/j  Q- 

7*  ? 

*5 '8 

o n-5 
r t w 

3-3E  s 

5 z ^ 


1 z 

2 n 


3 

■*< 

n 

3* 

fD 

n 

7T 


2 

03 

§& 

is 

Kq. 

i? 

"<  fD 
fD  — • 
CU  CTQ 
*i  3 


2 O 


3 
o 

3 

fD 

O 

•n 
Q_ 
fD 

-i 

yi  o ft 


“0 

o 


■o 


ftj 


n 

o 

£ 


n 

o 

£ 

£ 

o 

o 

o 

70 


fa* 

fan 


fD 

ft) 


era 

3 

3 

fD 

C 

“O 


5 

~0 

% 

CD 

-fa* 

O 


2 

O 

jo 


O 

70 

2 

25 

5 

z 

O 

70 

o 

c 

70 

2 

O 

z 


3-  n 3"0  n “O  "o 

o o o 3 o C E- 
3|3a3«2 

(D  L)  (t  c D Ml 

^ - 3 ;/)  -r 


fD 

c n ^ 5 '<  jQ 


fD  Q- 


t-j  l-  n -Z,  “i  ^ 

? S m o _ 

3 <*  3 n o a.  s 
JO  3 c S13  w ? 

^ 8 5.  o'  n>  g-^ 
2£o_n3nCL  — 
n>  ~ o *<  = 
=■  ° o' era  3 S £ 

(I)  77  3 ft)  n u ^ 
^ O ft)  2 m ^ 

P i 3 8 3 ™ 3- 
CO  Z.  <»  5 L- 

c O c'^  n c 

S’  era  Jft  O ~ ^ 

n 

3.  _ cr  a>  o 00  co 
D 3 O 3 < W (D 

5-|.s|  S-g.1 

3 3 o'  - 3 3 

^ 5- 

n'  3 ET  2 c Cl  ^ 

" 8<3§-3-<  » 

^ O'  CL  Jr  o"  x Q. 
P^  $ c 5"g  o 

O j . fD  ;?»  -5  (T> 
oftQyiO^ 

-<  3 O 3 if:  fD 

0^30  = 33 

dj  O > oj  era  =. 

?^3o^ 

O Q-  3 C O -r1 

:°3?  o 5-  -3 
3-  a> 


fD 


" O 

3 


fD 


1 C 

1 = 

* n 
nsi 

2 3 

Is 

£ 3 
fD  a. 
3 00 

fD 

o 

3 

a. 


oO 


n 

o 

3 

3 

o 

a. 

o 


a>  m — • -•  cl.  < 

cw  o 3^  3;  < 

; O * fD  O 5,1  CL 

C ^ 3 rj-  fD 

rr  a>  3 v- 

► -o  w»  n cd  A ^ 

! c c 3 3.  3 ^ 

: ^ ft>  era  O O cd 

3 c o. 


w Z o- 

3 ^ 


5 -j 
3 CD  C 
3-  <o.  3 

3 9 i i:  S 

1 I S 2 § C | 

Hlf&l? 

I o “3,? 

23°oJS3i. 

S»3-SJ« 

CD  -9  S'  3“  ft)  0 •“ 
N C O fD  ^ 

3 -O  O < Mi 
fD  3 S' 

• ^ - 0.-0 
i O 


1 3 o n 3 s 


I ol  I 

!*§ 

CD  fD 


L fO 


3 — c.  ^ 

|<S  §1  ir 

O Ml  ft)  C ' 


o 

n 

o 

3 

-a 


&» 

ora 

CD 

N# 

3* 

fD 


era 

1 n-<  3 55  Q-  5. 
!.12»  3”  5 

5 c 3-^3 

* g.  ft>  o_  3.  o c? 

5 fn  J3.  TT  C bj 

Uliill 

! g 5 I i- 5 1 

? - O O i $ n 

" 2. 5-  3. 5 E-  § 

_ M>  ' Ml  3 

r § z-o  i-  js’I 

. o 


Get  the  most  out  of  your  Commodore  computer  with  a subscription  to 
Commodore's  user  magazines 


>1.5K  Cl  8“ 

;o.i 

( 

^ CR2 

1N755 

7.5V 

pc;  1 J 

1 39 

PA2  5 \ 

1 18 

PB0  ] -J 

1 4 

PBt  ) J 

10 

PBo  1 

1 11 

pb3  J ] 

PB4  J 1 

13 

pb5  J 

! 14 

pb6  ) 

15 

pb7  ] 

16 

FLAG2  ) ( 

) 17 

IRQ 

d7 

pa7 

d6 

pa6 

d5 

pa5 

d4 

pa4 

d3 

pa3 

d2 

Di 

CNT 

U2 

D0 

SP 

6526 

PC 

CIA 

rs3 

pa2 

(DD00-DDFF) 

rs2 

1 o 
(XI 
CL 

RS-| 

pBi 

RS0 

pb2 

pb3 

<t>2 

pb4 

RES 

pb5 

R/W 

pb6 

PA0 

pb7 

pAi 

FLAG 

TOD  GND 

CS 

33 

a3 

35 

a2 

36 

Ai 

37  An 


f-e 


<a^?> 


+ 5 V 
CAN 


C103  ZZ.  0.1 


_ 34 


22  VA14 


C . | ( va14  > 

JC!i> 


cia2 


<^aT> 


CARTRIDGE  EXPANSION 
CN6 


FB20 


9 V UNREG 


COMMODORE  64S 

SCHEMATIC  DIAGRAM 


-(  CAEC^> 


E2  PAL 

hVcO  O 9 JUMPER 

SELECT 

El 


+ VC 

Q 


C64e 


i10 

25V 


LI 

m 

2.2/xH 


X NTSC 


C82 


C63  ZZZ 


ir-i 

o.i  _L 


0.47 

50V 

20% 


Cfil  -L-  0 47 
061  -T-  50V 


Y1 

(See  note  2) 


n 


t-vc 

o 


+ vc 
o 


-0  + 5 V 


C68 

Ht 


C70 
lOpF 
±5% 


13 


R26  > 75fi 

12  1 15 

VCC 


it— i 

o.i 


U29 

74LS74 


Q GND 

CLOCK 


6 NC  "cAN 


C65  a 


10 

J 25V 


_nnnn — r?Bi9i- 

2.2/xH  1 


+ vc 


C66  rr 


0.47 

50V 

20% 


0.47 
50; 


1 2 3 


fVC 

O 


U31 

RNG  74LS629N  vco 


EN  GND  Y 


9 |10  C58  ZZZ  0.1 


vc 

O 


C84 


I 

JL  o.i 


C74 


16  15  10 


1 9 


083  33pF 
H(— ^50V 


o.i 


<£color)- 

14.31818  MHz 


Vcc  A B C D CRY  LOAD 
r-t>  CNT  UP 


+ Vco >CNT  DN 


U30 

74LS193 


rf-  R19| 


DOT  CLOCK  y 
8.1818MHz 


R22  > 1.5K 

C87  r:  0.1 


U29 

74LS74 


C85 

Ht- 


R16  < 
R17  1K  * 


Q7 

PN2222A 


_14 

vcc 


PHASE 

DETECT 


CHARGE 

PUMP 


10  U32 

MC4044 


X 


( RESET^> 


VR1 

MD7812CT 


CR5  C90 

-N- 


C59  “ 0.22 
C57  l 


10 
U 25V 


X 


C89  ^ 0.1 

C88 


1N4001 

470 


470 

50V 


50V 
CR6  ^ 


+ 9 V 
UNREG  * 


+ 5 V 
CAN 


C103  ZZZ  0.1 


VR2 

V 

M08  f <\j  X 
(j-  L 

7805 

Cl  9 i=±=j2200 
16V 


R50 

+ 5 VO VW 

1 M 


+ 5 V 

9 


C39 

Ht 


it— i 

0.1  X 


rst2  vcc 

U8 

7406 

—l^o— 

mhl2  OUT2 

9 13  12 

dis2 

R36 

-A-W-O  + 5 V 
IK 


U20 

556 


cv2 


TRIGo 


X — OX> 


© 


© 


9 VAC 

FI  P*\A  V- 


. 100 
C91  i=*si  16V 

C92ZZ  0.22 


|— ir 

i 0.1 


C98 

\h 


C21 

I ( 

0.22 
100  V 


T 


Cl  00 
0.22 


9 6 o 


1 7^ 

o 

CM 

co 
u_ 

T 


J (X  j 

L5  [ 

| I 

1.2/xH  i 

-|  FB21  [■ 


0.22 
100  V 


0.22 

25V 


LED  CONNECTOR 
CN10 


Note: 

1.  Vc  should  be  used  to  drive  only  devices  indicated. 

2.  Y1  = 14.31818  MHz— NTSC. 

17.734472  MHz— PAL. 

3.  All  resistors  are  1/4  watt  ± 5%  unless  otherwise  specified. 

4.  All  capacitor  values  are  in  /xF  unless  otherwise  specified. 


^ SHIELD  GND 

v J"XL 


POWER  INPUT 
(7-PIN  MALE  DIN) 
CN7 


commodore 

© 1962 


CARTRIDGE/EXPANSION 
(44-PIN  FEMALE) 
CN6 


AEC 


15 

9 

12 

7 

OE 

Y 

A3 

y3 

Yi 

U14 

74LS258 

B3 

A2 

b2 

vT 

A1 

1 1 

B1 

A0 

T0 

B0 

Vcc  SELA  GND 

1 16  1 

8 

ITT 

— 

< 

> 

o 

13  VA 

15 

5 

6 v/v^ 

+ V 

Ml  OUT 

RF 

MODULATOR 

CASE 

VIDEO 

AUDIO 

*VIC  and  SID  should  have  separate  ground  returns. 


COMMODORE  64! 

SCHEMATIC  DIAGRAM 


C1  commodore 

© -1982 


« 


AUDIQ/VIDEO 
(5-PIN  FEMALE  DIN) 
CN5 


